











Request for Proposals

Consulting Services









Procurement of: 

Borrower Completion Report (BCR)



RFP No: ET-MOALR-383056-CS-QCBS

Consulting Services for: Project completion report

Client: Ministry of Agriculture

Country: Ethiopia

Issued on: January 10, 2024





TABLE OF CONTENT



PART I	3

Section 1.  Request for Proposal Letter	3

Section 2. Instructions to Consultants and Data Sheet	7

Section 3.  Technical Proposal – Standard Forms	39

Section 4.  Financial Proposal - Standard Forms	55

Section 5.  Eligible Countries	65

Section 6.  Fraud and Corruption	67

Section 7:  Terms of Reference	69

PART III	123

Section 9. Notification of Intention to Award and Beneficial Ownership Forms	123











PART I

	







Section 1.  Request for Proposal Letter 



Request for Proposal Letter

Consulting Services



Name of Assignment: Borrower Completion Report for the Project

RFP Reference No.: ET-MOALR-383056-CS-QCBS

Loan No./Credit No./ Grant No.: IDA 6312-ET, Project ID: P163383

Country: Ethiopia

Date: January10, 2024



Subject: - Sending of RLLP Borrower Completion Report RFP



  To: ABidan Development Consulting Group

         Addis Ababa



           CEDEP Consultants

          Addis Ababa

           WABEKBON Development Consultant plc

          Addis Ababa



           Frontier Consulting PLC.

          Addis Ababa



          Green Sober Environmental Management Consultants Pvt. Ltd. Co (GEMCO)

          Addis Ababa



          Centre for Evaluation and Development (c4ed))

          Germany

Dear Mr. /Ms.:



 The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (hereinafter called “Borrower”) has received financing from the International Development Association (IDA) (the “Bank”) towards the cost of Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Project. The Ministry of Agriculture, an implementing agency of the Client, intends to apply a portion of the proceeds of this financing to eligible payments under the contract for which this Request for Proposals is issued. Ministry of Agriculture has been allocated funds from World Bank which are administered by International Development Association (IDA) (the “Bank”) and executed by the Ministry of Agriculture (“the Client”). The [Client/ Recipient] intends to apply the funds to eligible payments under the contract for which this Request for Proposals is issued. Payments by the Bank will be made only at the request of the Client and upon approval by the Bank, and will be subject, in all respects, to the terms and conditions of the financing agreement. The financing agreement prohibits a withdrawal from the financing agreement for the purpose of any payment to persons or entities, or for any import of goods, if such payment or import, to the knowledge of the Bank, is prohibited by a decision of the United Nations Security council taken under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. No party other than the Borrower shall derive any rights from the financing agreement or have any claims to the proceeds of the financing agreement. “For this contract, the Borrower shall process the payments using the Direct Payment disbursement method, as defined in the World Bank’s Disbursement Guidelines for Investment Project Financing.”

The Client now invites proposals to provide the following consulting services (hereinafter called “Services”): Borrower Completion Report (BCR) for the RLLP. More details on the Services are provided in the Terms of Reference (ToR) (Section 7).

This Request for Proposals (RFP) has been addressed to the following shortlisted Consultants:

ABidan Development Consulting Group

CEDEP Consultants

WABEKBON Development Consultant plc

Frontier Consulting PLC.

Green Sober Environmental Management Consultants Pvt. Ltd. Co (GEMCO)

Centre for Evaluation and Development (c4ed))



It is not permissible to transfer this RFP to any other firm.

A firm will be selected under Quality and Cost Base Selection Method (QCBS) procedures and in a Full Technical Proposal (FTP) format as described in this RFP, in accordance with the Bank’s “Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers” July 2016  Revised November 2017 and August 2018 (“Procurement Regulations”), which can be found at the following website: www.worldbank.org

The RFP includes the following documents:

Section 1 – Request for Proposals Letter

Section 2 - Instructions to Consultants and Data Sheet

Section 3 - Technical Proposal FTP - Standard Forms

Section 4 - Financial Proposal - Standard Forms

Section 5 – Eligible Countries

Section 6 – Fraud and Corruption

Section 7 - Terms of Reference

Section 8 - Standard Forms of Contract Lump-Sum

Please inform us on or before January 19, 2021 in writing at Ministry of Agriculture, Resilient Landscape and Livelihoods Project (RLLP), physically or by E-mail kinfumz@yahoo.com, CC: habtamuhailu@yahoo.com or degayehu@gmail.com:

(a)	that you have received this Request for Proposals; and

(b)	whether you intend to submit a proposal alone or intend to enhance your experience by requesting permission to associate with other firm(s) (if permissible under Section 2, Instructions to Consultants (ITC), Data Sheet 14.1.1).

Attention is drawn to the Procurement Regulations requiring the Borrower to disclose information on the successful Consultant’s beneficial ownership, as part of the Contract Award Notice, using the Beneficial Ownership Disclosure Form as included in the Request for Proposals.



Details on the proposal’s submission date, time and address are provided in ITC 17.7 and ITC 17.9.

Yours sincerely,





Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Resilient Landscape and Livelihood Project (RLLP)

Kinfu Bekabil, Senior Procurement and Contract Management Specialist

Addis Ababa, Gurd Shola, Behind Geological Survey, Block B 2nd floor 

Telephone:- +251-6461300/+251-911-193610

kinfumz@yahoo.com, habtamuhailu@yahoo.com, degayehu@gmail.com





	







Section 2. Instructions to Consultants and Data Sheet



TABLE OF CONTENT



A.  General Provisions	9

1.	Definitions	9

2.	Introduction	11

3.	Conflict of Interest	12

4.	Unfair Competitive Advantage	13

5.	Fraud and Corruption	13

6.	Eligibility	13

B.  Preparation of Proposals	15

7.	General Considerations	15

8.	Cost of Preparation of Proposal	15

9.	Language	15

10.	Documents Comprising the Proposal	15

11.	Only One Proposal	15

12.	Proposal Validity	16

13.	Clarification and Amendment of RFP	17

14.	Preparation of Proposals Specific Considerations	17

15.	Technical Proposal Format and Content	18

16.	Financial Proposal	18

C.  Submission, Opening and Evaluation	19

17.	Submission, Sealing, and Marking of Proposals	19

18.	Confidentiality	21

19.	Opening of Technical Proposals	21

20.	Proposals Evaluation	21

21.	Evaluation of Technical Proposals	22

22.	Financial Proposals for QBS	22

23.	Public Opening of Financial Proposals (for QCBS, FBS, and LCS methods)	22

24.	Correction of Errors	24

25.	Taxes	24

26.	Conversion to Single Currency	24

27.	Combined Quality and Cost Evaluation	25

D.  Negotiations and Award	25

28.	Negotiations	25

29.	Conclusion of Negotiations	26

30.	Standstill Period	27

31.	Notification of Intention to Award	27

32.	Notification of Award	28

33.	Debriefing by the Client	29

34.	Signing of Contract	29

35.	Procurement Related Complaint	29

E.  Data Sheet	30





Instructions to Consultants

A.  General Provisions

Definitions

“Affiliate(s)” means an individual or an entity that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with the Consultant.

“Applicable Law” means the laws and any other instruments having the force of law in the Client’s country, or in such other country as may be specified in the Data Sheet, as they may be issued and in force from time to time.

“Bank” means the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) or the International Development Association (IDA).

“Borrower” means the Government, Government agency or other entity that signs the financing agreement with the Bank.

“Client” means the implementing agency that signs the Contract for the Services with the selected Consultant.

 Client’s Personnel” is as defined in Clause GCC 1.1(e). 

“Consultant” means a legally-established professional consulting firm or an entity that may provide or provides the Services to the Client under the Contract. 

“Contract” means a legally binding written agreement signed between the Client and the Consultant and includes all the attached documents listed in its Clause 1 (the General Conditions of Contract (GCC), the Special Conditions of Contract (SCC), and the Appendices).

“Contractor” is as defined in Clause GCC 1.1.(h).

“Contractor’s Personnel” is as defined in Clause GCC 1.1(i). 

“Data Sheet” means an integral part of the Instructions to Consultants (ITC) Section 2 that is used to reflect specific country and assignment conditions to supplement, but not to over-write, the provisions of the ITC.

“Day” means a calendar day, unless otherwise specified as “Business Day”. A Business Day is any day that is an official working day of the Borrower. It excludes the Borrower’s official public holidays.

“ES” means environmental and social (including Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment (SH)).

“Experts” means, collectively, Key Experts, Non-Key Experts, or any other personnel of the Consultant, Sub-consultant or Joint Venture member(s).

“Government” means the government of the Client’s country. 

“in writing” means communicated in written form (e.g. by mail, e-mail, fax, including, if specified in the Data Sheet, distributed or received through the electronic-procurement system used by the Client) with proof of receipt;

“Joint Venture (JV)” means an association with or without a legal personality distinct from that of its members, of more than one Consultant where one member has the authority to conduct all business for and on behalf of any and all the members of the JV, and where the members of the JV are jointly and severally liable to the Client for the performance of the Contract.

“Key Expert(s)” means an individual professional whose skills, qualifications, knowledge and experience are critical to the performance of the Services under the Contract and whose CV is taken into account in the technical evaluation of the Consultant’s proposal.

“ITC” (this Section 2 of the RFP) means the Instructions to Consultants that provides the shortlisted Consultants with all information needed to prepare their Proposals.

“Non-Key Expert(s)” means an individual professional provided by the Consultant or its Sub-consultant and who is assigned to perform the Services or any part thereof under the Contract and whose CVs are not evaluated individually.

“Proposal” means the Technical Proposal and the Financial Proposal of the Consultant.

“RFP” means the Request for Proposals to be prepared by the Client for the selection of Consultants, based on the SPD - RFP.

“Services” means the work to be performed by the Consultant pursuant to the Contract.

“Sexual Exploitation and Abuse” “(SEA)”* means the following:

Sexual Exploitation is defined as any actual or attempted abuse of position of vulnerability, differential power or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily, socially or politically from the sexual exploitation of another. 

Sexual Abuse is defined as the actual or threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under unequal or coercive conditions.  

“Sexual Harassment” “(SH)”* is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature by the Experts with other Experts, Contractor’s (if applicable) or Client’s Personnel.

“SPD - RFP” means the Standard Procurement Document - Request for Proposals, which must be used by the Client as the basis for the preparation of the RFP.

“Sub-consultant” means an entity to whom the Consultant intends to subcontract any part of the Services while the Consultant remains responsible to the Client during the whole performance of the Contract.

“Terms of Reference (TORs)” (this Section 7 of the RFP) means the Terms of Reference that explains the objectives, scope of work, activities, and tasks to be performed, respective responsibilities of the Client and the Consultant, and expected results and deliverables of the assignment. 

*In the context of supervision of infrastructure contracts (such as Works or Plant) and other consulting services where the social risks are substantial or high, a non-exhaustive list of (i) behaviors which constitute SEA and (ii) behaviors which constitute SH is attached to the Code of Conduct form in Section 3.

Introduction

The Client named in the Data Sheet intends to select a Consultant from those listed in the Request for Proposals (RFP), in accordance with the method of selection specified in the Data Sheet. 

The shortlisted Consultants are invited to submit a Technical Proposal and a Financial Proposal, or a Technical Proposal only, as specified in the Data Sheet, for consulting services required for the assignment named in the Data Sheet. The Proposal will be the basis for negotiating and ultimately signing the Contract with the selected Consultant.

The Consultants should familiarize themselves with the local conditions and take them into account in preparing their Proposals, including attending a pre-proposal conference if one is specified in the Data Sheet. Attending any such pre-proposal conference is optional and is at the Consultants’ expense. 

The Client will timely provide, at no cost to the Consultants, the inputs, relevant project data, and reports required for the preparation of the Consultant’s Proposal as specified in the Data Sheet.

Conflict of Interest 



The Consultant is required to provide professional, objective, and impartial advice, at all times holding the Client’s interests paramount, strictly avoiding conflicts with other assignments or its own corporate interests, and acting without any consideration for future work.

The Consultant has an obligation to disclose to the Client any situation of actual or potential conflict that impacts its capacity to serve the best interest of its Client. Failure to disclose such situations may lead to the disqualification of the Consultant or the termination of its Contract and/or sanctions by the Bank.

Without limitation on the generality of the foregoing, the Consultant shall not be hired under the circumstances set forth below:

a.  Conflicting Activities

(i)	Conflict between consulting activities and procurement of goods, works or non-consulting services: a firm that has been engaged by the Client to provide goods, works, or non-consulting services for a project, or any of its Affiliates, shall be disqualified from providing consulting services resulting from or directly related to those goods, works, or non-consulting services. Conversely, a firm hired to provide consulting services for the preparation or implementation of a project, or any of its Affiliates, shall be disqualified from subsequently providing goods or works or non-consulting services resulting from or directly related to the consulting services for such preparation or implementation. 

b.  Conflicting Assignments

(ii)	Conflict among consulting assignments: a Consultant (including its Experts and Sub-consultants) or any of its Affiliates shall not be hired for any assignment that, by its nature, may be in conflict with another assignment of the Consultant for the same or for another Client.

c. Conflicting Relationships

(iii)	Relationship with the Client’s staff: a Consultant (including its Experts and Sub-consultants) that has a close business or family relationship with a professional staff  of the Borrower (or of the Client, or of implementing agency, or of a recipient of a part of the Bank’s financing) who are directly or indirectly involved in any part of (i) the preparation of the Terms of Reference for the assignment, (ii) the selection process for the Contract, or (iii) the supervision of the Contract, may not be awarded a Contract, unless the conflict stemming from this relationship has been resolved in a manner acceptable to the Bank throughout the selection process and the execution of the Contract.

Unfair Competitive Advantage

Fairness and transparency in the selection process require that the Consultants or their Affiliates competing for a specific assignment do not derive a competitive advantage from having provided consulting services related to the assignment in question. To that end, the Client shall indicate in the Data Sheet and make available to all shortlisted Consultants together with this RFP all information that would in that respect give such Consultant any unfair competitive advantage over competing Consultants.  

Fraud and Corruption

The Bank requires compliance with the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines and its prevailing sanctions policies and procedures as set forth in the WBG’s Sanctions Framework, as set forth in Section 6.

In further pursuance of this policy, Consultants shall permit and shall cause their agents (where declared or not), subcontractors, sub consultants, service providers, suppliers, and their personnel, to permit the Bank to inspect all accounts, records and other documents relating to any shortlisting process, Proposal submission, and contract performance (in the case of award), and to have them audited by auditors appointed by the Bank.

Eligibility

The Bank permits consultants (individuals and firms, including Joint Ventures and their individual members) from all countries to offer consulting services for Bank-financed projects.

Furthermore, it is the Consultant’s responsibility to ensure that its Experts, joint venture members, Sub-consultants, agents (declared or not), sub-contractors, service providers, suppliers and/or their employees meet the eligibility requirements as established by the Bank in the applicable Procurement Regulations. 

As an exception to the foregoing ITC 6.1 and ITC 6.2 above: 

a. Sanctions

A Consultant that has been sanctioned by the Bank, pursuant to the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines and in accordance with its prevailing sanctions policies and procedures as set forth in the WBG’s Sanctions Framework as described in Section VI, Fraud and Corruption, paragraph 2.2 d., shall be ineligible to be shortlisted for, submit proposals for, or be awarded a Bank-financed contract or benefit from a Bank-financed contract, financially or otherwise, during such period of time as the Bank shall have determined. The list of debarred firms and individuals is available at the electronic address specified in the PDS. 

b. Prohibitions

Firms and individuals of a country or goods manufactured in a country may be ineligible if so indicated in Section 5 (Eligible Countries) and: 

(a) 	as a matter of law or official regulations, the Borrower’s country prohibits commercial relations with that country, provided that the Bank is satisfied that such exclusion does not preclude effective competition for the provision of Services required; or 

(b)	by an act of compliance with a decision of the United Nations Security Council taken under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, the Borrower’s Country prohibits any import of goods from that country or any payments to any country, person, or entity in that country.

c. Restrictions for State-Owned Enterprises

State-owned enterprises or institutions in the Borrower’s country may be eligible to compete and be awarded a contract only if they can establish, in a manner acceptable to the Bank, that they: (i) are legally and financially autonomous, (ii) operate under commercial law, and (iii) are not under supervision of the Client.  

d. Restrictions for Public Employees

Government officials and civil servants of the Borrower’s country are not eligible to be included as Experts, individuals, or members of a team of Experts in the Consultant’s Proposal unless: 

(i) the services of the government official or civil servant are of a unique and exceptional nature, or their participation is critical to project implementation; and

(ii) their hiring would not create a conflict of interest, including any conflict with employment or other laws, regulations, or policies of the Borrower.

e. Borrower Debarment 

A firm that is under a sanction of debarment by the Borrower from being awarded a contract is eligible to participate in this procurement, unless the Bank, at the Borrower’s request, is satisfied that the debarment; (a) relates to fraud or corruption, and (b) followed a judicial or administrative proceeding that afforded the firm adequate due process.

B.  Preparation of Proposals

General Considerations

In preparing the Proposal, the Consultant is expected to examine the RFP in detail. Material deficiencies in providing the information requested in the RFP may result in rejection of the Proposal.

Cost of Preparation of Proposal

The Consultant shall bear all costs associated with the preparation and submission of its Proposal, and the Client shall not be responsible or liable for those costs, regardless of the conduct or outcome of the selection process. The Client is not bound to accept any proposal, and reserves the right to annul the selection process at any time prior to Contract award, without thereby incurring any liability to the Consultant.

Language 

The Proposal, as well as all correspondence and documents relating to the Proposal exchanged between the Consultant and the Client, shall be written in the language(s) specified in the Data Sheet.

Documents Comprising the Proposal

The Proposal shall comprise the documents and forms listed in the Data Sheet.

If specified in the Data Sheet, the Consultant shall include a statement of an undertaking of the Consultant to observe, in competing for and executing a contract, the Client country’s laws against fraud and corruption (including bribery).

The Consultant shall furnish information on commissions, gratuities, and fees, if any, paid or to be paid to agents or any other party relating to this Proposal and, if awarded, Contract execution, as requested in the Financial Proposal submission form (Section 4). 

Only One Proposal

The Consultant (including the individual members of any Joint Venture) shall submit only one Proposal, either in its own name or as part of a Joint Venture in another Proposal. If a Consultant, including any Joint Venture member, submits or participates in more than one proposal, all such proposals shall be disqualified and rejected. This does not, however, preclude a Sub-consultant, or the Consultant’s staff from participating as Key Experts and Non-Key Experts in more than one Proposal when circumstances justify and if stated in the Data Sheet.

Proposal Validity

Proposals shall remain valid until the date specified in the Data Sheet or any extended date if amended by the Client in accordance with ITC 13.1.1.

During this period, the Consultant shall maintain its original Proposal without any change, including the availability of the Key Experts, the proposed rates and the total price. 

If it is established that any Key Expert nominated in the Consultant’s Proposal was not available at the time of Proposal submission or was included in the Proposal without his/her confirmation, such Proposal shall be disqualified and rejected for further evaluation, and may be subject to sanctions in accordance with ITC 5. 

a. Extension of Proposal Validity

The Client will make its best effort to complete the negotiations and award the contract prior to the date of expiry of the Proposal validity. However, should the need arise, the Client may request, in writing, all Consultants who submitted Proposals prior to the submission deadline to extend the Proposals’ validity. 

If the Consultant agrees to extend the validity of its Proposal, it shall be done without any change in the original Proposal and with the confirmation of the availability of the Key Experts, except as provided in ITC 12.7.

The Consultant has the right to refuse to extend the validity of its Proposal in which case such Proposal will not be further evaluated.

b. Substitution of Key Experts at Validity Extension 

If any of the Key Experts become unavailable for the extended validity period, the Consultant shall seek to substitute another Key Expert. The Consultant shall provide a written adequate justification and evidence satisfactory to the Client together with the substitution request. In such case, a substitute Key Expert shall have equal or better qualifications and experience than those of the originally proposed Key Expert. The technical evaluation score, however, will remain to be based on the evaluation of the CV of the original Key Expert.

If the Consultant fails to provide a substitute Key Expert with equal or better qualifications, or if the provided reasons for the replacement or justification are unacceptable to the Client, such Proposal will be rejected with the prior Bank’s no objection.

c. Sub-Contracting

The Consultant shall not subcontract the whole of the Services.

Clarification and Amendment of RFP 

The Consultant may request a clarification of any part of the RFP during the period indicated in the Data Sheet before the Proposals’ submission deadline. Any request for clarification must be sent in writing, or by standard electronic means, to the Client’s address indicated in the Data Sheet. The Client will respond in writing, or by standard electronic means, and will send written copies of the response (including an explanation of the query but without identifying its source) to all shortlisted Consultants. Should the Client deem it necessary to amend the RFP as a result of a clarification, it shall do so following the procedure described below: 

At any time before the proposal submission deadline, the Client may amend the RFP by issuing an amendment in writing or by standard electronic means. The amendment shall be sent to all shortlisted Consultants and will be binding on them. The shortlisted Consultants shall acknowledge receipt of all amendments in writing. 

If the amendment is substantial, the Client may extend the proposal submission deadline to give the shortlisted Consultants reasonable time to take an amendment into account in their Proposals. 

 The Consultant may submit a modified Proposal or a modification to any part of it at any time prior to the proposal submission deadline. No modifications to the Technical or Financial Proposal shall be accepted after the deadline.

Preparation of Proposals Specific Considerations

While preparing the Proposal, the Consultant must give particular attention to the following: 

If a shortlisted Consultant considers that it may enhance its expertise for the assignment by associating with other consultants in the form of a Joint Venture or as Sub-consultants, it may do so with either (a) non-shortlisted Consultant(s), or (b) shortlisted Consultants if permitted in the Data Sheet. In all such cases a shortlisted Consultant must obtain the written approval of the Client prior to the submission of the Proposal. When associating with non-shortlisted firms in the form of a joint venture or a sub-consultancy, the shortlisted Consultant shall be a lead member. If shortlisted Consultants associate with each other, any of them can be a lead member.  

The Client may indicate in the Data Sheet the estimated Key Experts’ time input (expressed in person-month) or the Client’s estimated total cost of the assignment, but not both. This estimate is indicative and the Proposal shall be based on the Consultant’s own estimates for the same. 

If stated in the Data Sheet, the Consultant shall include in its Proposal at least the same time input (in the same unit as indicated in the Data Sheet) of Key Experts, failing which the Financial Proposal will be adjusted for the purpose of comparison of proposals and decision for award in accordance with the procedure in the Data Sheet. 

For assignments under the Fixed-Budget selection method, the estimated Key Experts’ time input is not disclosed. Total available budget, with an indication whether it is inclusive or exclusive of taxes, is given in the Data Sheet, and the Financial Proposal shall not exceed this budget.

Technical Proposal Format and Content

The Technical Proposal shall be prepared using the Standard Forms provided in Section 3 of the RFP and shall comprise the documents listed in the Data Sheet. The Technical Proposal shall not include any financial information. A Technical Proposal containing material financial information shall be declared non-responsive. 

15.1.1 Consultant shall not propose alternative Key Experts. Only one CV shall be submitted for each Key Expert position. Failure to comply with this requirement will make the Proposal non-responsive.

Depending on the nature of the assignment, the Consultant is required to submit a Full Technical Proposal (FTP), or a Simplified Technical Proposal (STP) as indicated in the Data Sheet and using the Standard Forms provided in Section 3 of the RFP. 

Financial Proposal

The Financial Proposal shall be prepared using the    Standard Forms provided in Section 4 of the RFP. It shall list all costs associated with the assignment, including (a) remuneration for Key Experts and Non-Key Experts, (b) reimbursable expenses indicated in the Data Sheet. 

a. Price Adjustment 

For assignments with a duration exceeding 18 months, a price adjustment provision for foreign and/or local inflation for remuneration rates applies if so stated in the Data Sheet.

b. Taxes

 The Consultant and its Sub-consultants and Experts are responsible for meeting all tax liabilities arising out of the Contract unless stated otherwise in the Data Sheet. Information on taxes in the Client’s country is provided in the Data Sheet.

c. Currency of Proposal 

 The Consultant may express the price for its Services in the currency or currencies as stated in the Data Sheet. If indicated in the Data Sheet, the portion of the price representing local cost shall be stated in the national currency. 

d. Currency of Payment

 Payment under the Contract shall be made in the currency or currencies in which the payment is requested in the Proposal.

C.  Submission, Opening and Evaluation

Submission, Sealing, and Marking of Proposals

The Consultant shall submit a signed and complete Proposal comprising the documents and forms in accordance with ITC 10 (Documents Comprising Proposal). Consultants shall mark as “CONFIDENTIAL” information in their Proposals which is confidential to their business. This may include proprietary information, trade secrets or commercial or financially sensitive information. The submission can be done by mail or by hand. If specified in the Data Sheet, the Consultant has the option of submitting its Proposals electronically. 

An authorized representative of the Consultant shall sign the original submission letters in the required format for both the Technical Proposal and, if applicable, the Financial Proposal and shall initial all pages of both. The authorization shall be in the form of a written power of attorney attached to the Technical Proposal.

A Proposal submitted by a Joint Venture shall be signed by all members so as to be legally binding on all members, or by an authorized representative who has a written power of attorney signed by each member’s authorized representative.

Any modifications, revisions, interlineations, erasures, or overwriting shall be valid only if they are signed or initialed by the person signing the Proposal.

The signed Proposal shall be marked “Original”, and its copies marked “Copy” as appropriate. The number of copies is indicated in the Data Sheet. All copies shall be made from the signed original. If there are discrepancies between the original and the copies, the original shall prevail.

The original and all the copies of the Technical Proposal shall be placed inside a sealed envelope clearly marked “Technical Proposal”, “[Name of the Assignment]“, [reference number], [name and address of the Consultant], and with a warning “Do Not Open until [insert the date and the time of the Technical Proposal submission deadline].” 

Similarly, the original Financial Proposal (if required for the applicable selection method) and its copies shall be placed inside of a separate sealed envelope clearly marked “Financial Proposal” “[Name of the Assignment], [reference number], [name and address of the Consultant]”, and with a warning “Do Not Open With The Technical Proposal.” 

The sealed envelopes containing the Technical and Financial Proposals shall be placed into one outer envelope and sealed. This outer envelope shall be addressed to the Client and bear the submission address, RFP reference number, the name of the assignment, the Consultant’s name and the address, and shall be clearly marked “Do Not Open Before [insert the time and date of the submission deadline indicated in the Data Sheet]”.

If the envelopes and packages with the Proposal are not sealed and marked as required, the Client will assume no responsibility for the misplacement, loss, or premature opening of the Proposal. 

The Proposal or its modifications must be sent to the address indicated in the Data Sheet and received by the Client no later than the deadline indicated in the Data Sheet, or any extension to this deadline. Any Proposal or its modification received by the Client after the deadline shall be declared late and rejected, and promptly returned unopened.

Confidentiality

From the time the Proposals are opened to the time the Contract is awarded, the Consultant should not contact the Client on any matter related to its Technical and/or Financial Proposal. Information relating to the evaluation of Proposals and award recommendations shall not be disclosed to the Consultants who submitted the Proposals or to any other party not officially concerned with the process, until the Notification of Intention to Award the Contract. Exceptions to this ITC are where the Client notifies Consultants of the results of the evaluation of the Technical Proposals.

Any attempt by shortlisted Consultants or anyone on behalf of the Consultant to influence improperly the Client in the evaluation of the Proposals or Contract award decisions may result in the rejection of its Proposal, and may be subject to the application of prevailing Bank’s sanctions procedures.

Notwithstanding the above provisions, from the time of the Proposals’ opening to the time of Contract award publication, if a Consultant wishes to contact the Client or the Bank on any matter related to the selection process, it shall do so only in writing.

Opening of Technical Proposals

The Client’s evaluation committee shall conduct the opening of the Technical Proposals in the presence of the shortlisted Consultants’ authorized representatives who choose to attend (in person, or online if this option is offered in the Data Sheet). The opening date, time and the address are stated in the Data Sheet. The envelopes with the Financial Proposal shall remain sealed and shall be securely stored with a reputable public auditor or independent authority until they are opened in accordance with ITC 23. 

At the opening of the Technical Proposals the following shall be read out: (i) the name and the country of the Consultant or, in case of a Joint Venture, the name of the Joint Venture, the name of the lead member and the names and the countries of all members; (ii) the presence or absence of a duly sealed envelope with the Financial Proposal; (iii) any modifications to the Proposal submitted prior to proposal submission deadline; and (iv) any other information deemed appropriate or as indicated in the Data Sheet.

Proposals Evaluation

Subject to provision of ITC 15.1, the evaluators of the Technical Proposals shall have no access to the Financial Proposals until the technical evaluation is concluded and the Bank issues its “no objection”, if applicable. 

The Consultant is not permitted to alter or modify its Proposal in any way after the proposal submission deadline except as permitted under ITC 12.7. While evaluating the Proposals, the Client will conduct the evaluation solely on the basis of the submitted Technical and Financial Proposals. 

Evaluation of Technical Proposals

The Client’s evaluation committee shall evaluate the Technical Proposals on the basis of their responsiveness to the Terms of Reference and the RFP, applying the evaluation criteria, sub-criteria, and point system specified in the Data Sheet. Each responsive Proposal will be given a technical score. A Proposal shall be rejected at this stage if it does not respond to important aspects of the RFP or if it fails to achieve the minimum technical score indicated in the Data Sheet.

Financial Proposals for QBS

 Following the ranking of the Technical Proposals, when the selection is based on quality only (QBS), the top-ranked Consultant is invited to negotiate the Contract.

If Financial Proposals were invited together with the Technical Proposals, only the Financial Proposal of the technically top-ranked Consultant is opened by the Client’s evaluation committee. All other Financial Proposals are returned unopened after the Contract negotiations are successfully concluded and the Contract is signed.

Public Opening of Financial Proposals (for QCBS, FBS, and LCS methods)

After the technical evaluation is completed and the Bank has issued its no objection (if applicable), the Client shall notify those Consultants whose Proposals were considered non-responsive to the RFP and TOR or did not meet the minimum qualifying technical score, advising them the following:

their Proposal was not responsive to the RFP and TOR or did not meet the minimum qualifying technical score;

provide information relating to the Consultant’s overall technical score, as well as scores obtained for each criterion and sub-criterion;

their Financial Proposals will be returned unopened after completing the selection process and Contract signing; and

notify them of the date, time and location of the public opening of the Financial Proposals and invite them to attend.

The Client shall simultaneously notify in writing those Consultants whose Proposals were considered responsive to the RFP and TOR, and that have achieved the minimum qualifying technical score, advising them the following:

their Proposal was responsive to the RFP and TOR and met the minimum qualifying technical score;

provide information relating to the Consultant’s overall technical score, as well as scores obtained for each criterion and sub-criterion;

their Financial Proposal will be opened at the public opening of Financial Proposals; and

notify them of the date, time and location of the public opening and invite them for the opening of the Financial Proposals.

The opening date shall be no less than ten (10) Business Days from the date of notification of the results of the technical evaluation, described in ITC 23.1 and 23.2. However, if the Client receives a complaint on the results of the technical evaluation within the ten (10) Business Days, the opening date shall be subject to ITC 35.1.

The Consultant’s attendance at the opening of the Financial Proposals (in person, or online if such option is indicated in the Data Sheet) is optional and is at the Consultant’s choice. 

 The Financial Proposals shall be opened publicly by the Client’s evaluation committee in the presence of the representatives of the Consultants and anyone else who chooses to attend. Any interested party who wishes to attend this public opening should contact the client as indicated in the Data Sheet. Alternatively, a notice of the public opening of Financial Proposals may be published on the Client’s website, if available. At the opening, the names of the Consultants, and the overall technical scores, including the break-down by criterion, shall be read aloud. The Financial Proposals will then be inspected to confirm that they have remained sealed and unopened. These Financial Proposals shall be then opened, and the total prices read aloud and recorded. Copies of the record shall be sent to all Consultants who submitted Proposals and to the Bank. 

Correction of Errors

Activities and items described in the Technical Proposal but not priced in the Financial Proposal, shall be assumed to be included in the prices of other activities or items, and no corrections are made to the Financial Proposal.

a. Time-Based Contracts



24.1.1 	If a Time-Based contract form is included in the RFP, the Client’s evaluation committee will (a) correct any computational or arithmetical errors, and (b) adjust the prices if they fail to reflect all inputs included for the respective activities or items included in the Technical Proposal. In case of discrepancy between (i) a partial amount (sub-total) and the total amount, or (ii) between the amount derived by multiplication of unit price with quantity and the total price, or (iii) between words and figures, the former will prevail. In case of discrepancy between the Technical and Financial Proposals in indicating quantities of input, the Technical Proposal prevails and the Client’s evaluation committee shall correct the quantification indicated in the Financial Proposal so as to make it consistent with that indicated in the Technical Proposal, apply the relevant unit price included in the Financial Proposal to the corrected quantity, and correct the total Proposal cost.

b. Lump-Sum Contracts



24.1.2   If a Lump-Sum contract form is included in the RFP, the Consultant is deemed to have included all prices in the Financial Proposal, so neither arithmetical corrections nor price adjustments shall be made. The total price, net of taxes understood as per ITC 25, specified in the Financial Proposal (Form FIN-1) shall be considered as the offered price. Where there is a discrepancy between the amount in words and the amount figures, the amount in words shall prevail. 

Taxes

The Client’s evaluation of the Consultant’s Financial Proposal shall exclude taxes and duties in the Client’s country in accordance with the instructions in the Data Sheet.

Conversion to Single Currency

For the evaluation purposes, prices shall be converted to a single currency using the selling rates of exchange, source and date indicated in the Data Sheet.

Combined Quality and Cost Evaluation



Quality and Cost-Based Selection (QCBS)



In the case of QCBS, the total score is calculated by weighting the technical and financial scores and adding them as per the formula and instructions in the Data Sheet. The Consultant with the Most Advantageous Proposal, which is the Proposal that achieves the highest combined technical and financial scores, will be invited for negotiations.

b. Fixed-Budget Selection (FBS)

In the case of FBS, those Proposals that exceed the budget indicated in ITC 14.1.4 of the Data Sheet shall be rejected.

The Client will select the Consultant with the Most Advantageous Proposal, which is the highest-ranked Technical Proposal that does not exceed the budget indicated in the RFP, and invite such Consultant to negotiate the Contract.

c. Least-Cost Selection

In the case of Least-Cost Selection (LCS), the Client will select the Consultant with the Most Advantageous Proposal, which is the Proposal with the lowest evaluated total price among those Proposals that achieved the minimum qualifying technical score, and invite such a Consultant to negotiate the Contract.

D.  Negotiations and Award

Negotiations

The negotiations will be held at the date and address indicated in the Data Sheet with the Consultant’s representative(s) who must have written power of attorney to negotiate and sign a Contract on behalf of the Consultant. 

The Client shall prepare minutes of negotiations that are signed by the Client and the Consultant’s authorized representative.

a. Availability of Key Experts

The invited Consultant shall confirm the availability of all Key Experts included in the Proposal as a pre-requisite to the negotiations, or, if applicable, a replacement in accordance with ITC 12. Failure to confirm the Key Experts’ availability may result in the rejection of the Consultant’s Proposal and the Client proceeding to negotiate the Contract with the next-ranked Consultant. 

Notwithstanding the above, the substitution of Key Experts at the negotiations may be considered if due solely to circumstances outside the reasonable control of and not foreseeable by the Consultant, including but not limited to death or medical incapacity. In such case, the Consultant shall offer a substitute Key Expert within the period of time specified in the letter of invitation to negotiate the Contract, who shall have equivalent or better qualifications and experience than the original candidate.

b. Technical Negotiations

The negotiations include discussions of the Terms of Reference (TORs), the proposed methodology, the Client’s inputs, the special conditions of the Contract, and finalizing the “Description of Services” part of the Contract. These discussions shall not substantially alter the original scope of services under the TOR or the terms of the contract, lest the quality of the final product, its price, or the relevance of the initial evaluation be affected. 

c. Financial Negotiations



 The negotiations include the clarification of the Consultant’s tax liability in the Client’s country and how it should be reflected in the Contract. 

If the selection method included cost as a factor in the evaluation, the total price stated in the Financial Proposal for a Lump-Sum contract shall not be negotiated. 

In the case of a Time-Based contract, unit rates negotiations shall not take place, except when the offered Key Experts and Non-Key Experts’ remuneration rates are much higher than the typically charged rates by consultants in similar contracts. In such case, the Client may ask for clarifications and, if the fees are very high, ask to change the rates after consultation with the Bank. The format for (i) providing information on remuneration rates in the case of Quality Based Selection; and (ii) clarifying remuneration rates’ structure under this Clause, is provided in Appendix A to the Financial Form FIN-3: Financial Negotiations – Breakdown of Remuneration Rates.

Conclusion of Negotiations

 The negotiations are concluded with a review of the finalized draft Contract, which then shall be initialed by the Client and the Consultant’s authorized representative. 

If the negotiations fail, the Client shall inform the Consultant in writing of all pending issues and disagreements and provide a final opportunity to the Consultant to respond. If disagreement persists, the Client shall terminate the negotiations informing the Consultant of the reasons for doing so. After having obtained the Bank’s no objection, the Client will invite the next-ranked Consultant to negotiate a Contract. Once the Client commences negotiations with the next-ranked Consultant, the Client shall not reopen the earlier negotiations. 

Standstill Period

The Contract shall not be awarded earlier than the expiry of the Standstill Period. The Standstill Period shall be ten (10) Business Days unless extended in accordance with ITC 33. The Standstill Period commences the day after the date the Client has transmitted to each Consultant (that has not already been notified that it has been unsuccessful) the Notification of Intention to Award the Contract. Where only one Proposal is submitted, or if this contract is in response to an emergency situation recognized by the Bank, the Standstill Period shall not apply. 

Notification of Intention to Award

The Client shall send to each Consultant (that has not already been notified that it has been unsuccessful) the Notification of Intention to Award the Contract to the successful Consultant. The Notification of Intention to Award shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

the name and address of the Consultant with whom the client successfully negotiated a contract;

the contract price of the successful Proposal;

the names of all Consultants included in the short list, indicating those that submitted Proposals; 

where the selection method requires, the price offered by each Consultant as read out and as evaluated;

the overall technical scores and scores assigned for each criterion and sub-criterion to each Consultant; 

the final combined scores and the final ranking of the Consultants; 

a statement of the reason(s) why the recipient’s Proposal was unsuccessful, unless the combined score in (f) above already reveals the reason;

the expiry date of the Standstill Period; and

instructions on how to request a debriefing and/or submit a complaint during the Standstill Period. 

Notification of Award 

Upon expiry of the Standstill Period, specified in ITC 30.1 or any extension thereof, and upon satisfactorily addressing any complaint that has been filed within the Standstill Period, the Client shall, send a notification of award to the successful Consultant, confirming the Client’s intention to award the Contract to the successful Consultant and requesting the successful Consultant to sign and return the draft negotiated Contract within eight (8) Business Days from the date of receipt of such notification.   If specified in the Data Sheet, the client shall simultaneously request the successful Consultant to submit, within eight (8) Business Days, the Beneficial Ownership Disclosure Form.

Contract Award Notice

Within ten (10) Business Days from the date of notification of award such request, the Client shall publish the Contract Award Notice which shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 

name and address of the Client;

name and reference number of the contract being awarded, and the selection method used; 

names of the consultants that submitted proposals, and their proposal prices as read out at financial proposal opening, and as evaluated; 

names of all Consultants whose Proposals were rejected or were not evaluated, with the reasons therefor; 

the name of the successful consultant, the final total contract price, the contract duration and a summary of its scope; and.

successful Consultant’s Beneficial Ownership Disclosure Form, if specified in Data Sheet ITC 32.1.

The Contract Award Notice shall be published on the Client’s website with free access if available, or in at least one newspaper of national circulation in the Client’s Country, or in the official gazette. The Client shall also publish the contract award notice in UNDB online

Debriefing by the Client

On receipt of the Client’s Notification of Intention to Award referred to in ITC 31.1, an unsuccessful Consultant has three (3) Business Days to make a written request to the Client for a debriefing. The Client shall provide a debriefing to all unsuccessful Consultants whose request is received within this deadline.

Where a request for debriefing is received within the deadline, the Client shall provide a debriefing within five (5) Business Days, unless the Client decides, for justifiable reasons, to provide the debriefing outside this timeframe. In that case, the standstill period shall automatically be extended until five (5) Business Days after such debriefing is provided.  If more than one debriefing is so delayed, the standstill period shall not end earlier than five (5) Business Days after the last debriefing takes place. The Client shall promptly inform, by the quickest means available, all Consultants of the extended standstill period

Where a request for debriefing is received by the Client later than the three (3)-Business Day deadline, the Client should provide the debriefing as soon as practicable, and normally no later than fifteen (15) Business Days from the date of publication of Public Notice of Award of contract. Requests for debriefing received outside the three (3)-day deadline shall not lead to extension of the standstill period.  

Debriefings of unsuccessful Consultants may be done in writing or verbally. The Consultants shall bear their own costs of attending such a debriefing meeting

Signing of Contract

The Contract shall be signed prior to the expiry date of the Proposal validity and promptly after expiry of the Standstill Period, specified in ITC 30.1 or any extension thereof, and upon satisfactorily addressing any complaint that has been filed within the Standstill Period. 

The Consultant is expected to commence the assignment on the date and at the location specified in the Data Sheet.

Procurement Related Complaint

The procedures for making a Procurement-related Complaint are as specified in the Data Sheet.



Section 2. Instructions to Consultants

E.  Data Sheet

ITC 

Reference

A. General

1 (b) 

Applicable Law: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopian

2.1

Name of the Client: Ministry of Agriculture

Method of selection Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) as per 

the IPF Procurement Regulations July 2016 Revised November 2017 and August 2018 (available on www.worldbank.org)

2.2

Financial Proposal shall be submitted together with Technical Proposal in a separate envelop.

The name of the assignment is: Borrower Completion Report (BCR) for RLLP financed by World Bank.

2.3

There is no a pre-proposal conference 

2.4

The Client will provide: Project documents including copy of the financing agreement, PAD, PIM, Procurement Manual, Project Procurement Strategy Document (PPSD), Procurement Plan, etc. which are required to carry out the assignment.

4.1

None

6.3.1

A list of debarred firms and individuals is available at the Bank’s external website: www.worldbank.org/debarr 

B. Preparation of Proposals

9.1

Proposals shall be submitted in English language

10.1

The Proposal shall comprise the following: 

For FULL TECHNICAL PROPOSAL (FTP): 

1st Inner Envelope with the Technical Proposal:

Power of Attorney to sign the Proposal   

TECH-1

TECH-2

TECH-3

TECH-4

TECH-5

TECH-6

 TECH-7 Code of Conduct  

AND

2nd Inner Envelope with the Financial Proposal:

(1) FIN-1

(2) FIN-2

(3) FIN-3

(4) FIN-4

(5) Statement of Undertaking (if required under Data Sheet 10.2 below)

10.2

Statement of Undertaking is required: Yes     X    , or No __________

11.1

Participation of Sub-consultants, Key Experts and Non-Key Experts in more than one Proposal is permissible: Yes _________ or   No   X    

12.1

Proposals shall be valid until May 10, 2024

13.1

Clarifications may be requested no later than 15 days prior to the submission deadline.

The contact information for requesting clarifications is: 

Ministry of Agriculture 

Resilient Landscapes and Livelihood Project (RLLP) Coordinating Unit

2nd Floor (Building B)

Telephone:+251-911-193610  

E-mail: kinfumz@yahoo.com

14.1.1 



Shortlisted Consultants may associate with 

(a) non-shortlisted consultant(s): Yes _______ or  No __ x___Or 

(b) other shortlisted Consultants:  Yes _______ or  No __x___

14.1.2

Estimated input of Key Experts’ time-input: 4 (Four) person-months. 

14.1.3

Not applicable

14.1.4 and 27.2

Not applicable

15.2

The format of the Technical Proposal to be submitted is:  FTP 

Submission of the Technical Proposal in a wrong format may lead to the Proposal being deemed non-responsive to the RFP requirements.

16.1



(1)	a per diem allowance in respect of Personnel of the Consultant for every day in which the Personnel shall be absent from the home office and, as applicable, outside the Client’s country for purposes of the Services;

(2)	cost of necessary travel, including transportation of the Personnel by the most appropriate means of transport and the most direct practicable route;

(3)	cost of office accommodation, investigations and surveys;

(4)	cost of applicable international or local communications such as the use of telephone and facsimile required for the purpose of the Services;

(5)	cost, rental and freight of any instruments or equipment required; 

(6)	cost of printing and dispatching of the reports to be produced for the Services;

(7)	other allowances where applicable and provisional or fixed sums (if any); and

(8)	Cost of such further items required for purposes of the Services not covered in the foregoing.

Should be provided by the Consultants for the purposes of the Services.

16.2

There is no a price adjustment provision applies to remuneration rates

16.3

Information on the Consultant’s tax obligations in the Client’s country can be found in www.erca. gov.et

16.4

The Financial Proposal shall be stated in the following currencies:

Consultant may express the price for their Services in any fully convertible currency, singly or in combination of up to three foreign currencies.

The Financial Proposal shall be stated in Birr for local experts

The Financial Proposal should state local costs in Ethiopian Birr

C. Submission, Opening and Evaluation

17.1

The Consultant has no the option of submitting its Proposals electronically except the technical proposal.

The consultant shall submit a soft copy of the technical proposal for the purpose of evaluation.

17.4



The consultant shall submit hard copy, it must be submitted:

(a) Technical Proposal: one (1) original and Two (2) copies;

(b) Financial Proposal: one (1) original and Two (2) copies

17.7 and 17.9



The Proposals must be submitted no later than:

Date   February 9, 2024

Time: 10:00 A.M.

The Proposal submission address is: 

Ministry of Agriculture Procurement Directorate

Street Name: CMC Road Behind Geological Survey

Building B, Floor Number 2.

City: Addis Ababa.

E-Mail: kinfumz@yahoo.com

19.1

An online option of the opening of the Technical Proposals is offered: Yes ____or No____X____

19.2

Not Available

21.1

(for FTP)







Criteria, sub-criteria, and point system for the evaluation of the Full Technical Proposals:

                         Criteria                                                                                             Points

(i)	Specific experience of the Consultant (as a firm) relevant to the Assignment:	10

ii)	Adequacy and quality of the proposed methodology, and work plan in responding to the Terms of Reference (TORs):                                                                                30 

[Notes to Consultant: The Client will assess whether the proposed methodology is clear, responds to the TORs, work plan is realistic and implementable; overall team composition is balanced and has an appropriate skills mix; and the work plan has right input of Experts] 



(iii)	Key Experts’ qualifications and competence for the Assignment:        55

{Notes to Consultant: each position number corresponds to the same for the Key Experts in Form TECH-6 to be prepared by the Consultant}

a)	Position K-1: [Project Management Specialist & Team leader]	      [10]

b)	Position K-2: [Agricultural Economist]	[8]

c)	Position K-3:[Natural Resources Management Specialist]                  [8]

d) Position K-4:[ Institutional & Capacity Building Specialist]                 [6]

e) Position K-5:[ Land administration specialist]                                      [6]

f) Position K-6:[ Environmental & social safeguards]                               [6]

g) Position K-7:[ Procurement and/or financial management]                  [6]

h) Position K-8: [Field Surveyors]                                                             [5]

	Total points for criterion (iii):	[55]

The number of points to be assigned to each of the above positions shall be determined considering the following three sub-criteria and relevant percentage weights:

1)  General qualifications (general education, training, and experience):      [20 %]

2)  Adequacy for the Assignment (relevant education, training, experience in the sector/similar assignments) :                                                                         [ 70%]

3)	 Relevant experience in the region (working level fluency in local language(s)/knowledge of local culture or administrative system, government organization, etc.):       [ 10 %]                              

	          Total weight:	    100%



(v)	Participation by nationals among proposed Key Experts	 [ 5]



Total points for the four criteria:	    100



 The minimum technical score (St) required to pass is:           70



Public Opening of Financial Proposals 

23.1

An online option of the opening of the Financial Proposals: Yes ___or No__X_____.

23.4

An online option of the opening of the Financial Proposals is offered: Yes ____or No__X______.

23.5

Following the completion of the evaluation of the Technical Proposals, the Client will notify all Consultants of the location, date and time of the public opening of Financial Proposals.

Any interested party who wishes to attend this public opening should contact Ato Kinfe Bekabil, E-Mail- kinfumz@yahoo.com, and request to be notified of the location, date and time of the public opening of Financial Proposals. The request should be made before the deadline for submission of Proposals, stated above.

Alternatively, a notice of the public opening of Financial Proposals may be published on the Client’s website, if available.

25.1 

For the purpose of the evaluation, the Client will exclude: (a) all local identifiable indirect taxes such as sales tax, excise tax, VAT, or similar taxes levied on the contract’s invoices; and (b) all additional local indirect tax on the remuneration of services rendered by non-resident experts in the Client’s country. If a Contract is awarded, at Contract negotiations, all such taxes will be discussed, finalized (using the itemized list as a guidance but not limiting to it) and added to the Contract amount as a separate line, also indicating which taxes shall be paid by the Consultant and which taxes are withheld and paid by the Client on behalf of the Consultant.

26.1



The single currency for the conversion of all prices expressed in various currencies into a single one is: Ethiopia Birr

The official source of the selling (exchange) rate is: Commercial Bank of Ethiopia

The date of the exchange rate is:  Financial proposal opening date

27.1 

(QCBS only)



The lowest evaluated Financial Proposal (Fm) is given the maximum financial score (Sf) of 100.

The formula for determining the financial scores (Sf) of all other Proposals is calculated as following:

Sf = 100 x Fm/ F, in which “Sf” is the financial score, “Fm” is the lowest price, and “F” the price of the proposal under consideration.

The weights given to the Technical (T) and Financial (P) Proposals are:

T =  80%,  and P = 20%

Proposals are ranked according to their combined technical (St) and financial (Sf) scores using the weights (T = the weight given to the Technical Proposal; P = the weight given to the Financial Proposal; T + P = 1) as following:  S = St x T% + Sf x P%.



D. Negotiations and Award

28.1

Expected date and address for contract negotiations: 

Date: - February 23, 2024 

Address: Ministry of Agriculture, RLLP office Block B, 2nd floor.	

32.1

The successful Consultant shall submit the Beneficial Ownership Disclosure Form.

34.2

Expected date for the commencement of the Services: February 29, 2024Date: at: Ministry of Agriculture, RLLP office Block B, 2nd floor.

35.1

The procedures for making a Procurement-related Complaint are detailed in the “Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers (Annex III).” If a Consultant wishes to make a Procurement procedure for making procurement related complaint” enter-related Complaint, the Consultant shall submit its complaint following these procedures, In Writing (by the quickest means available, such as by email or fax), to:

For the attention: Ato Degayehu Desso

Title/position: Procurement Director of MoA

Client: Ministry of Agriculture

Email address: degayehu@gmail.com

In summary, a Procurement-related Complaint may challenge any of the following:

the terms of this Request for Proposal;

the Client’s decision to exclude a consultant from the procurement process prior to the award of contract; and

the Client’s decision to award the contract.



Section 3.  Technical Proposal – Standard Forms

{Notes to Consultant shown in brackets {  } throughout Section 3 provide guidance to the Consultant to prepare the Technical Proposal; they should not appear on the Proposals to be submitted.}



Checklist of Required Forms

Required for FTP or STP



FORM

DESCRIPTION

Page Limit



FTP

STP











TECH-1

Technical Proposal Submission Form. 



 If applicable

TECH-1 Attachment

If the Proposal is submitted by a joint venture, attach a letter of intent or a copy of an existing agreement. 



 If applicable

Power of Attorney

No pre-set format/form. In the case of a Joint Venture, several are required: a power of attorney for the authorized representative of each JV member, and a power of attorney for the representative of the lead member to represent all JV members







TECH-2

Consultant’s Organization and Experience. 









TECH-2A

A. Consultant’s Organization







TECH-2B

B. Consultant’s Experience









TECH-3

Comments or Suggestions on the Terms of Reference and on Counterpart Staff and Facilities to be provided by the Client.







TECH-3A

A. On the Terms of Reference







TECH-3B

B. On the Counterpart Staff and Facilities







TECH-4

Description of the Approach, Methodology, and Work Plan for Performing the Assignment







TECH-5

Work Schedule and Planning for Deliverables







TECH-6

Team Composition, Key Experts Inputs, and attached Curriculum Vitae (CV) 







TECH-7

Code of Conduct (ES)







All pages of the original Technical and Financial Proposal shall be initialed by the same authorized representative of the Consultant who signs the Proposal.







Form TECH-1  

Technical Proposal Submission Form

{Location, Date}



To:	[Name and address of Client]



Dear Sirs:

	We, the undersigned, offer to provide the consulting services for [Insert title of assignment] in accordance with your Request for Proposals (RFP) dated [Insert Date] and our Proposal.  [Select appropriate wording depending on the selection method stated in the RFP: “We are hereby submitting our Proposal, which includes this Technical Proposal and a Financial Proposal sealed in a separate envelope” or, if only a Technical Proposal is invited “We hereby are submitting our Proposal, which includes this Technical Proposal only in a sealed envelope.”]. 



	{If the Consultant is a joint venture, insert the following: We are submitting our Proposal a joint venture with: {Insert a list with full name and the legal address of each member, and indicate the lead member}. We have attached a copy {insert: “of our letter of intent to form a joint venture” or, if a JV is already formed, “of the JV agreement”} signed by every participating member, which details the likely legal structure of and the confirmation of joint and severable liability of the members of the said joint venture.



{OR



If the Consultant’s Proposal includes Sub-consultants, insert the following: We are submitting our Proposal with the following firms as Sub-consultants: {Insert a list with full name and address of each Sub-consultant.}



We hereby declare that: 

All the information and statements made in this Proposal are true and we accept that any misinterpretation or misrepresentation contained in this Proposal may lead to our disqualification by the Client and/or may be sanctioned by the Bank.

Our Proposal shall be valid and remain binding upon us until [insert day, month and year in accordance with ITC 12.1]. 

We have no conflict of interest in accordance with ITC 3.

We meet the eligibility requirements as stated in ITC 6, and we confirm our understanding of our obligation to abide by the Bank’s policy in regard to Fraud and Corruption as per ITC 5.



We, along with any of our sub-consultants, subcontractors, suppliers, or service providers for any part of the contract, are not subject to, and not controlled by any entity or individual that is subject to, a temporary suspension or a debarment imposed by the World Bank Group or a debarment imposed by the World Bank Group in accordance with the Agreement for Mutual Enforcement of Debarment Decisions between the World Bank and other development banks. Further, we are not ineligible under the Client’s country laws or official regulations or pursuant to a decision of the United Nations Security Council;

[Note to Client: Only if required in ITC10.2 (Data Sheet 10.2), include the following: In competing for (and, if the award is made to us, in executing) the Contract, we undertake to observe the laws against fraud and corruption, including bribery, in force in the country of the Client.] 

Except as stated in the Data Sheet, ITC 12.7, we undertake to negotiate a Contract on the basis of the proposed Key Experts. We accept that the substitution of Key Experts for reasons other than those stated in ITC 12 and ITC 28.4 may lead to the termination of Contract negotiations.

 (h) 	Our Proposal is binding upon us and subject to any modifications resulting from the Contract negotiations.

We undertake, if our Proposal is accepted and the Contract is signed, to initiate the Services related to the assignment no later than the date indicated in ITC 34.2 of the Data Sheet.

We understand that the Client is not bound to accept any Proposal that the Client receives.



	We remain,



Yours sincerely,



_________________________________________________________________

Signature (of Consultant’s authorized representative) {In full and initials}:  

Full name:	{insert full name of authorized representative}

Title: 	{insert title/position of authorized representative}

Name of Consultant (company’s name or JV’s name):

Capacity: 	{insert the person’s capacity to sign for the Consultant}

Address:  	{insert the authorized representative’s address}

Phone/fax:	{insert the authorized representative’s phone and fax number, if applicable}

Email:  	{insert the authorized representative’s email address}	



{For a joint venture, either all members shall sign or only the lead member, in which case the power of attorney to sign on behalf of all members shall be attached}



Form TECH-2 (for Full Technical Proposal Only)



Consultant’s Organization and Experience





Form TECH-2: a brief description of the Consultant’s organization and an outline of the recent experience of the Consultant that is most relevant to the assignment. In the case of a joint venture, information on similar assignments shall be provided for each partner. For each assignment, the outline should indicate the names of the Consultant’s Key Experts and Sub-consultants who participated, the duration of the assignment, the contract amount (total and, if it was done in a form of a joint venture or a sub-consultancy, the amount paid to the Consultant), and the Consultant’s role/involvement.  



A - Consultant’s Organization



1. Provide here a brief description of the background and organization of your company, and – in case of a joint venture – of each member for this assignment.

2. Include organizational chart, a list of Board of Directors, and beneficial ownership. [If required under Data Sheet ITC 32.1, the successful Consultant shall provide additional information on beneficial ownership, using the Beneficial Ownership Disclosure Form.]

B - Consultant’s Experience





1. 	List only previous similar assignments successfully completed in the last [.....] years.

2. 	List only those assignments for which the Consultant was legally contracted by the Client as a company or was one of the joint venture members. Assignments completed by the Consultant’s individual experts working privately or through other consulting firms cannot be claimed as the relevant experience of the Consultant, or that of the Consultant’s partners or sub-consultants, but can be claimed by the Experts themselves in their CVs. The Consultant should be prepared to substantiate the claimed experience by presenting copies of relevant documents and references if so requested by the Client.





Duration



Assignment name/& brief description of main deliverables/outputs

Name of Client & Country of Assignment



Approx. Contract value (in US$ equivalent)/ Amount paid to your firm

Role on the Assignment











{e.g., Jan.2009– Apr.2010}

{e.g., “Improvement quality of...............”: designed master plan for rationalization of ........; }

{e.g., Ministry of ......, country}

{e.g., US$1 mill/US$0.5 mill}



{e.g., Lead partner in a JV A&B&C}











{e.g., Jan-May 2008}

{e.g., “Support to sub-national government.....” : drafted secondary level regulations on..............}

{e.g., municipality of........., country}

{e.g., US$0.2 mil/US$0.2 mil}

{e.g., sole Consultant}













Form TECH-3 (for Full Technical Proposal)



Comments and Suggestions on the Terms of Reference, Counterpart Staff, and Facilities to be Provided by the Client



Form TECH-3: comments and suggestions on the Terms of Reference that could improve the quality/effectiveness of the assignment; and on requirements for counterpart staff and facilities, which are provided by the Client, including: administrative support, office space, local transportation, equipment, data, etc.





A - On the Terms of Reference





{improvements to the Terms of Reference, if any}





B - On Counterpart Staff and Facilities





{comments on counterpart staff and facilities to be provided by the Client. For example, administrative support, office space, local transportation, equipment, data, background reports, etc., if any} 









Form TECH-4 (for Full Technical Proposal Only)



Description of Approach, Methodology, and Work Plan in Responding to the Terms of Reference





Form TECH-4: a description of the approach, methodology and work plan for performing the assignment, including a detailed description of the proposed methodology and staffing for training, if the Terms of Reference specify training as a specific component of the assignment.



{Suggested structure of your Technical Proposal (in FTP format):



Technical Approach and Methodology 

Work Plan

Organization and Staffing} 



a)	Technical Approach and Methodology.  {Please explain your understanding of the objectives of the assignment as outlined in the Terms of Reference (TORs), the technical approach, and the methodology you would adopt for implementing the tasks [Note to Client: add the following for supervision of infrastructure contracts such as Plant or Works and for other consulting services where the social risks are substantial or high]: “(including on the [environmental and] social aspects)” to deliver the expected output(s), and the degree of detail of such output. Please do not repeat/copy the TORs in here.}



b)	Work Plan.  {Please outline the plan for the implementation of the main activities/tasks of the assignment, their content and duration, phasing and interrelations, milestones (including interim approvals by the Client), and tentative delivery dates of the reports. The proposed work plan should be consistent with the technical approach and methodology, showing your understanding of the TOR and ability to translate them into a feasible working plan. A list of the final documents (including reports) to be delivered as final output(s) should be included here. The work plan should be consistent with the Work Schedule Form.}



c)	Organization and Staffing. {Please describe the structure and composition of your team, including the list of the Key Experts, Non-Key Experts and relevant technical and administrative support staff.}







Form TECH-5 (for FTP and STP)



Work Schedule and planning for deliverables







N°

Deliverables 1 (D-..)

Months

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

.....

n

TOTAL

D-1

{e.g., Deliverable #1: Report A



























1) data collection 

                                                 

























2)  drafting



























3) inception report      



























4) incorporating comments



























5)  delivery of final report to Client}

















































































D-2

{e.g., Deliverable #2:...............}











































































































































1	List the deliverables with the breakdown for activities required to produce them and other benchmarks such as the Client’s approvals.  For phased assignments, indicate the activities, delivery of reports, and benchmarks separately for each phase.

2	Duration of activities shall be indicated in a form of a bar chart.

3.     Include a legend, if necessary, to help read the chart.



Form TECH-6 (for FTP and STP)



Team Composition, Assignment, and Key Experts’ inputs



N°

Name

Expert’s input (in person/month) per each Deliverable (listed in TECH-5)

Total time-input 

(in Months)

Position



D-1



D-2



D-3

........



D-...







Home

Field

Total

KEY EXPERTS





























K-1

{e.g., Mr. Abbbb}

[Team Leader]

[Home]

[2 month]



[1.0]



[1.0]



















[Field]

[0.5 m]



[2.5]



[0]

















K-2































































K-3































































































































n





















































































Subtotal







NON-KEY EXPERTS

































N-1





[Home]





























[Field]





























N-2



































































































































n























































































Subtotal





























Total









1	For Key Experts, the input should be indicated individually for the same positions as required under the Data Sheet ITC21.1.

2	Months are counted from the start of the assignment/mobilization.  One (1) month equals twenty two (22) working (billable) days. One working (billable) day shall be not less than eight (8) working (billable) hours.

3	“Home” means work in the office in the expert’s country of residence. “Field” work means work carried out in the Client’s country or any other country outside the expert’s country of residence.



                       Full time input

                         Part time input







Form TECH-6

(Continued)



CURRICULUM VITAE (CV)





Position Title and No.

{e.g., K-1, TEAM LEADER}

Name of Expert: 

{Insert full name}

Date of Birth:

{day/month/year}

Country of Citizenship/Residence





Education: {List college/university or other specialized education, giving names of educational institutions, dates attended, degree(s)/diploma(s) obtained}

________________________________________________________________________



Employment record relevant to the assignment: {Starting with present position, list in reverse order. Please provide dates, name of employing organization, titles of positions held, types of activities performed and location of the assignment, and contact information of previous clients and employing organization(s) who can be contacted for references. Past employment that is not relevant to the assignment does not need to be included.}



Period

Employing organization and your title/position. Contact information for references

Country 

Summary of activities performed relevant to the Assignment

[e.g., May 2005-present]

[e.g., Ministry of ……, advisor/consultant to…



For references: Tel…………/e-mail……; Mr. Hbbbbb, deputy minister]























Membership in Professional Associations and Publications: ______________________________________________________________________



Language Skills (indicate only languages in which you can work): ______________

______________________________________________________________________



Adequacy for the Assignment:



Detailed Tasks Assigned on Consultant’s Team of Experts: 



Reference to Prior Work/Assignments that Best Illustrates Capability to Handle the Assigned Tasks

{List all deliverables/tasks as in TECH- 5 in which the Expert will be involved)





 















	



 Expert’s contact information: (e-mail …………………., phone……………)



Certification:

I, the undersigned, certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief, this CV correctly describes myself, my qualifications, and my experience, and I am available, as and when necessary, to undertake the assignment in case of an award. I understand that any misstatement or misrepresentation described herein may lead to my disqualification or dismissal by the Client, and/or sanctions by the Bank. 







										{day/month/year}



Name of Expert 					 Signature 					Date





										{day/month/year}



Name of authorized 				Signature						Date

Representative of the Consultant 

(the same who signs the Proposal)	





Note: the CV shall sign by the candidate and the consulting firm  

          representative dually. Unsigned CV will be rejected.

Form TECH-7 (for FTP and STP))



[Note to Client: include this requirement for supervision of infrastructure contracts (such as Plant or Works) and for other consulting services where the social risks are substantial or high .]



Note to the Client: 

The following minimum requirements shall not be modified. The Client may include additional requirements to address identified issues, informed by relevant environmental and social assessment.



Delete this Box prior to issuance of the RFP.



Note to the Consultant: 

The minimum content of the Code of Conduct form as set out by the Client shall not be substantially modified. However, the Consultant may add requirements as appropriate, including to take into account Contract-specific issues/risks.  

The Consultant shall initial and submit the Code of Conduct form as part of its Proposal.



CODE OF CONDUCT FOR EXPERTS (ES) Form

We are the Consultant, [enter name of Consultant].  We have signed a contract with [enter name of Client] for [enter description of the Services]. These Services will be carried out at [enter the Site and other locations where the Services will be carried out, as appropriate]. Our contract requires us to implement measures to address environmental and social risks related to the Services, including the risks of sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment.   

This Code of Conduct is part of our measures to deal with environmental and social risks related to the Services.  It applies to all Experts in places where the Services are being carried out.  

This Code of Conduct identifies the behavior that we require from all Experts. 

Our workplace is an environment where unsafe, offensive, abusive or violent behavior will not be tolerated and where all persons should feel comfortable raising issues or concerns without fear of retaliation.

REQUIRED CONDUCT

Experts shall:

carry out his/her duties competently and diligently;

comply with this Code of Conduct and all applicable laws, regulations and other requirements, including requirements to protect the health, safety and well-being of other Experts and any other person; 

maintain a safe working environment including, as applicable, by:

ensuring that workplaces, equipment and processes under each person’s control are safe and without risk to health; 

wearing required personal protective equipment; and   

following applicable emergency operating procedures.

report work situations that he/she believes are not safe or healthy and remove himself/herself from a work situation which he/she reasonably believes presents an imminent and serious danger to his/her life or health;

treat other people with respect, and not discriminate against specific groups such as women, people with disabilities, migrant workers or children;

not engage in Sexual Harassment, which means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature with other Experts, Contractor’s Personnel (if applicable) or Client’s Personnel;

not engage in Sexual Exploitation, which means any actual or attempted abuse of position of vulnerability, differential power or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily, socially or politically from the sexual exploitation of another;

 not engage in Sexual Abuse, which means the actual or threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under unequal or coercive conditions; 

 not engage in any form of sexual activity with individuals under the age of 18, except in case of pre-existing marriage; 

complete relevant training courses that will be provided related to the environmental and social aspects of the Contract, including on health and safety matters, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA), and Sexual Harassment (SH);

report violations of this Code of Conduct; and

not retaliate against any person who reports violations of this Code of Conduct, whether to us or the Client, or who makes use of grievance mechanism for Experts, if any, or the project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism. 

RAISING CONCERNS 

If any person observes behavior that he/she believes may represent a violation of this Code of Conduct, or that otherwise concerns him/her, he/she should raise the issue promptly. This can be done in either of the following ways:

Contact [enter name of the Consultant’s social expert with relevant experience in handling sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment cases, or if such person is not required under the Contract, another individual designated by the Consultant to handle these matters] in writing at this address [   ] or by telephone at [   ] or in person at [   ]; or

Call [  ]  to reach the Consultant’s hotline (if any) and leave a message.



The person’s identity will be kept confidential, unless reporting of allegations is mandated by the country law. Anonymous complaints or allegations may also be submitted and will be given all due and appropriate consideration. We take seriously all reports of possible misconduct and will investigate and take appropriate action. We will provide warm referrals to service providers that may help support the person who experienced the alleged incident, as appropriate. 

There will be no retaliation against any person who raises a concern in good faith about any behavior prohibited by this Code of Conduct.  Such retaliation would be a violation of this Code of Conduct.  

CONSEQUENCES OF VIOLATING THE CODE OF CONDUCT

Any violation of this Code of Conduct by Experts may result in serious consequences, up to and including termination and possible referral to legal authorities.

FOR EXPERT:

I have received a copy of this Code of Conduct written in a language that I comprehend.  I understand that if I have any questions about this Code of Conduct, I can contact [enter name of Consultant’s contact person(s) with relevant experience] requesting an explanation.  

Name of Expert: [insert name]				

Signature: __________________________________________________________

Date: (day month year): _______________________________________________



Countersignature of authorized representative of the Consultant:

Signature: ________________________________________________________

Date: (day month year): ______________________________________________





ATTACHMENT 1: Behaviors constituting Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and behaviors constituting Sexual Harassment (SH)



ATTACHMENT 1 TO THE CODE OF CONDUCT FORM

BEHAVIORS CONSTITUTING SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE (SEA) AND BEHAVIORS CONSTITUTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT (SH)

The following non-exhaustive list is intended to illustrate types of prohibited behaviors:

Examples of sexual exploitation and abuse include, but are not limited to:

An Expert tells a member of the community that he/she can get them jobs related to the Services (e.g. cooking and cleaning) in exchange for sex.

An Expert that is connecting electricity input to households says that he can connect women headed households to the grid in exchange for sex.

An Expert rapes, or otherwise sexually assaults a member of the community.

An Expert denies a person access to the Site unless he/she performs a sexual favor.  

An Expert tells a person applying for employment under the Contract that he/she will only hire him/her if he/she has sex with him/her. 

Examples of sexual harassment in a work context 

An Expert comment on the appearance of another Expert (either positive or negative) and sexual desirability. 

When An Expert complains about comments made by another Expert on his/her appearance, the other Expert comment that he/she is “asking for it” because of how he/she dresses.

Unwelcome touching of an Expert or Employer’s Personnel by another Expert. 

An Expert tells another Expert that he/she will get him/her a salary raise, or promotion if he/she sends him/her naked photographs of himself/herself.







Section 4.  Financial Proposal - Standard Forms

{Notes to Consultant shown in brackets {  } provide guidance to the Consultant to prepare the Financial Proposals; they should not appear on the Financial Proposals to be submitted.}



Financial Proposal Standard Forms shall be used for the preparation of the Financial Proposal according to the instructions provided in Section 2.



FIN-1	Financial Proposal Submission Form



FIN-2	Summary of Costs



FIN-3	Breakdown of Remuneration, including Appendix A “Financial Negotiations - Breakdown of Remuneration Rates” in the case of QBS method



FIN-4	Reimbursable expenses



Form FIN-1

Financial Proposal Submission Form





{Location, Date}



To:	[Name and address of Client]





Dear Sirs:



	We, the undersigned, offer to provide the consulting services for [Insert title of assignment] in accordance with your Request for Proposal dated [Insert Date] and our Technical Proposal.  



Our attached Financial Proposal is for the amount of {Indicate the corresponding to the amount(s) currency(ies)} {Insert amount(s) in words and figures}, [Insert “including” or “excluding”] of all indirect local taxes in accordance with ITC 25.1 in the Data Sheet. The estimated amount of local indirect taxes is {Insert currency} {Insert amount in words and figures} which shall be confirmed or adjusted, if needed, during negotiations. {Please note that all amounts shall be the same as in Form FIN-2}.



	Our Financial Proposal shall be valid and remain binding upon us, subject to the modifications resulting from Contract negotiations, for the period of time specified in the Data Sheet, ITC 12.1.



	Commissions and gratuities paid or to be paid by us to an agent or any third party relating to preparation or submission of this Proposal and Contract execution, paid if we are awarded the Contract, are listed below:



	Name and Address	Amount and	Purpose of Commission

	of Agents	Currency	or Gratuity

					

					



{If no payments are made or promised, add the following statement: “No commissions or gratuities have been or are to be paid by us to agents or any third party relating to this Proposal and Contract execution.”}



	We understand you are not bound to accept any Proposal you receive.



	We remain,



Yours sincerely,



_________________________________________________________________

Signature (of Consultant’s authorized representative) {In full and initials}:  

Full name:	{insert full name of authorized representative}

Title: 	{insert title/position of authorized representative}

Name of Consultant (company’s name or JV’s name):

Capacity: 	{insert the person’s capacity to sign for the Consultant}

Address:  	{insert the authorized representative’s address}

Phone/fax:	{insert the authorized representative’s phone and fax number, if applicable}

Email:  	{insert the authorized representative’s email address}	



{For a joint venture, either all members shall sign or only the lead member/consultant, in which case the power of attorney to sign on behalf of all members shall be attached}



Form FIN-2 Summary of Costs

	

Item

Cost



{Consultant must state the proposed Costs in accordance with ITC 16.4 of the Data Sheet; delete columns which are not used}



{Insert Foreign Currency # 1}

{Insert Foreign Currency # 2, if used}

{Insert Foreign Currency # 3, if used}

{Insert

 Local Currency, if used and/or required (16.4 Data Sheet}

Cost of the Financial Proposal 









Including:









(1) Remuneration 









(2) Reimbursables









Total Cost of the Financial Proposal:

{Should match the amount in Form FIN-1}









Indirect Local Tax Estimates – to be discussed and finalized at the negotiations if the Contract is awarded

{insert type of tax. e.g., VAT or sales tax}











{e.g., income tax on non-resident experts} 











{insert type of tax} 









Total Estimate for Indirect Local Tax:













Footnote: Payments will be made in the currency(ies) expressed above (Reference to ITC 16.4).



FORM FIN-3 BREAKDOWN of Remuneration



When used for Lump-Sum contract assignment, information to be provided in this Form shall only be used to demonstrate the basis for the calculation of the Contract’s ceiling amount; to calculate applicable taxes at contract negotiations; and, if needed, to establish payments to the Consultant for possible additional services requested by the Client. This Form shall not be used as a basis for payments under Lump-Sum contracts 



A. Remuneration 	

No.

Name

Position (as in TECH-6)

Person-month Remuneration Rate

Time Input in Person/Month

(from TECH-6)

{Currency # 1- as in FIN-2}

{Currency # 2- as in FIN-2}

{Currency# 3- as in FIN-2}

{Local Currency- as in FIN-2}



Key Experts

















K-1





[Home]













[Field]











K-2





























































































Non-Key  Experts 















N-1





[Home]











N-2

[Field]















































Total Costs













Appendix A. Financial Negotiations - Breakdown of Remuneration Rates

Review of Remuneration Rates

The remuneration rates are made up of salary or a base fee, social costs, overheads, profit, and any premium or allowance that may be paid for assignments away from headquarters or a home office.  An attached Sample Form can be used to provide a breakdown of rates. 

If the RFP requests submission of a technical proposal only, the Sample Form is used by the selected Consultant to prepare for the negotiations of the Contract. If the RFP requests submission of the financial proposal, the Sample Form shall be completed and attached to the Financial Form-3.  Agreed (at the negotiations) breakdown sheets shall form part of the negotiated Contract and included in its Appendix D or C. 

At the negotiations the firm shall be prepared to disclose its audited financial statements for the last three years, to substantiate its rates, and accept that its proposed rates and other financial matters are subject to scrutiny.  The Client is charged with the custody of government funds and is expected to exercise prudence in the expenditure of these funds.  

Rate details are discussed below:

Salary is the gross regular cash salary or fee paid to the individual in the firm’s home office.  It shall not contain any premium for work away from headquarters or bonus (except where these are included by law or government regulations).

Bonuses are normally paid out of profits.  To avoid double counting, any bonuses shall not normally be included in the “Salary” and should be shown separately.  Where the Consultant’s accounting system is such that the percentages of social costs and overheads are based on total revenue, including bonuses, those percentages shall be adjusted downward accordingly.  Where national policy requires that 13 months’ pay be given for 12 months’ work, the profit element need not be adjusted downward.  Any discussions on bonuses shall be supported by audited documentation, which shall be treated as confidential.

Social Charges are the costs of non-monetary benefits and may include, inter alia, social security (including pension, medical, and life insurance costs) and the cost of a paid sick and/or annual leave.  In this regard, a paid leave during public holidays or an annual leave taken during an assignment if no Expert’s replacement has been provided is not considered social charges.  

Cost of Leave. The principles of calculating the cost of total days leave per annum as a percentage of basic salary is normally calculated as follows:



	Leave cost as percentage of salary =  

	Where w = weekends, ph = public holidays, v = vacation, and s = sick leave.



	Please note that leave can be considered as a social cost only if the Client is not charged for the leave taken.

Overheads are the Consultant’s business costs that are not directly related to the execution of the assignment and shall not be reimbursed as separate items under the Contract. Typical items are home office costs (non-billable time, time of senior Consultant’s staff monitoring the project, rent of headquarters’ office, support staff, research, staff training, marketing, etc.), the cost of Consultant’s personnel not currently employed on revenue-earning projects, taxes on business activities, and business promotion costs. During negotiations, audited financial statements, certified as correct by an independent auditor and supporting the last three years’ overheads, shall be available for discussion, together with detailed lists of items making up the overheads and the percentage by which each relates to basic salary.  The Client does not accept an add-on margin for social charges, overhead expenses, etc. for Experts who are not permanent employees of the Consultant.  In such case, the Consultant shall be entitled only to administrative costs and a fee on the monthly payments charged for sub-contracted Experts.

Profit is normally based on the sum of the Salary, Social costs, and Overheads.  If any bonuses paid on a regular basis are listed, a corresponding reduction shall be made in the profit amount. Profit shall not be allowed on travel or any other reimbursable expenses.

Away from Home Office Allowance or Premium or Subsistence Allowances. Some Consultants pay allowances to Experts working away from headquarters or outside of the home office.  Such allowances are calculated as a percentage of salary (or a fee) and shall not draw overheads or profit.  Sometimes, by law, such allowances may draw social costs.  In this case, the amount of this social cost shall still be shown under social costs, with the net allowance shown separately.

	UNDP standard rates for the particular country may be used as reference to determine subsistence allowances. 



Sample Form







Consultant:	Country:

Assignment:	Date:





Consultant’s Representations Regarding Costs and Charges





We hereby confirm that:



(a)	the basic fees  indicated in the attached table are taken from the firm’s payroll records and reflect the current  rates of the Experts listed which have not been raised other than within the normal annual pay increase policy as applied to all the Consultant’s Experts;



(b)	attached are true copies of the latest pay slips of the Experts listed;



(c)	the away- from- home office allowances indicated below are those that the Consultant has agreed to pay for this assignment to the Experts listed;



(d)	the factors listed in the attached table for social charges and overhead are based on the firm’s average cost experiences for the latest three years as represented by the firm’s financial statements; and



(e)	said factors for overhead and social charges do not include any bonuses or other means of profit-sharing.



	

[Name of Consultant]



			

Signature of Authorized Representative	Date



Name:  	



Title:  	



Consultant’s Representations Regarding Costs and Charges

(Model Form I)



(Expressed in {insert name of currency*})



Personnel

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Name

Position

Basic Remuneration Rate  per Working Month/Day/Year

Social Charges1

Overhead1

Subtotal

Profit2

Away from Home Office Allowance

Proposed Fixed Rate per Working Month/Day/Hour

Proposed Fixed Rate per Working Month/Day/Hour1

Home Office

































































































Client’s Country

































































































{* If more than one currency is used, use additional table(s), one for each currency}

1.	Expressed as percentage of 1

2.	Expressed as percentage of 4





Form  FIN-4  Breakdown of Reimbursable Expenses



When used for Lump-Sum contract assignment, information to be provided in this Form shall only be used to demonstrate the basis for calculation of the Contract ceiling amount, to calculate applicable taxes at contract negotiations and, if needed, to establish payments to the Consultant for possible additional services requested by the Client. This form shall not be used as a basis for payments under Lump-Sum contracts 



B. Reimbursable Expenses 	

N°

Type of Reimbursable Expenses

Unit

Unit Cost

Quantity

{Currency # 1- as in FIN-2}

{Currency # 2- as in FIN-2}

{Currency# 3- as in FIN-2}

{Local Currency- as in FIN-2}



{e.g., Per diem allowances**}

{Day}















{e.g., International flights}

{Ticket}















{e.g., In/out airport transportation} 

{Trip}















{e.g., Communication costs between Insert place and Insert place}

















{ e.g., reproduction of reports}

















{e.g., Office rent}

















....................................

















{Training of the Client’s personnel – if required in TOR}















	Total Costs













Legend: 

“Per diem allowance” is paid for each night the expert is required by the Contract to be away from his/her usual place of residence. Client can set up a ceiling.

Section 5.  Eligible Countries



In reference to ITC 6.3.2, for the information of shortlisted Consultants, at the present time firms, goods and services from the following countries are excluded from this selection:



Under the ITC 6.3.2 (a): ________________ [list country/countries following approval by the Bank to apply the restriction or state “none”]



Under the ITC 6.3.2 (b): ________________ [list country/countries or indicate “none”]







Section 6.  Fraud and Corruption

(This Section 6, Fraud and Corruption shall not be modified)





Purpose

The Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines and this annex apply with respect to procurement under Bank Investment Project Financing operations.

Requirements

The Bank requires that Borrowers (including beneficiaries of Bank financing); bidders (applicants/proposers), consultants, contractors and suppliers; any sub-contractors, sub-consultants, service providers or suppliers; any agents (whether declared or not); and any of their personnel, observe the highest standard of ethics during the procurement process, selection and contract execution of Bank-financed contracts, and refrain from Fraud and Corruption.



To this end, the Bank:

Defines, for the purposes of this provision, the terms set forth below as follows:

“corrupt practice” is the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, of anything of value to influence improperly the actions of another party;

“fraudulent practice” is any act or omission, including misrepresentation, that knowingly or recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation;

“collusive practice” is an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve an improper purpose, including to influence improperly the actions of another party;

“coercive practice” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or indirectly, any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions of a party;

“obstructive practice” is:

deliberately destroying, falsifying, altering, or concealing of evidence material to the investigation or making false statements to investigators in order to materially impede a Bank investigation into allegations of a corrupt, fraudulent, coercive, or collusive practice; and/or threatening, harassing, or intimidating any party to prevent it from disclosing its knowledge of matters relevant to the investigation or from pursuing the investigation; or

acts intended to materially impede the exercise of the Bank’s inspection and audit rights provided for under paragraph 2.2 e. below.

Rejects a proposal for award if the Bank determines that the firm or individual recommended for award, any of its personnel, or its agents, or its sub-consultants, sub-contractors, service providers, suppliers and/ or their employees, has, directly or indirectly, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive, or obstructive practices in competing for the contract in question;

In addition to the legal remedies set out in the relevant Legal Agreement, may take other appropriate actions, including declaring misprocurement, if the Bank determines at any time that representatives of the Borrower or of a recipient of any part of the proceeds of the loan engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive, or obstructive practices during the procurement process, selection and/or execution of the contract in question,  without the Borrower having taken timely and appropriate action satisfactory to the Bank to address such practices when they occur, including by failing to inform the Bank in a timely manner at the time  they knew of the practices; 

Pursuant to the Bank’s Anti- Corruption Guidelines and in accordance with the Bank’s prevailing sanctions policies and procedures, may sanction a firm or individual, either indefinitely or for a stated period of time, including by publicly declaring such firm or individual ineligible (i) to be awarded or otherwise benefit from a Bank-financed contract, financially or in any other manner; (ii) to be a nominated sub-contractor, consultant, manufacturer or supplier, or service provider of an otherwise eligible firm being awarded a Bank-financed contract; and (iii) to receive the proceeds of any loan made by the Bank or otherwise to participate further in the preparation or implementation of any Bank-financed project; 

Requires that a clause be included in bidding/request for proposals documents and in contracts financed by a Bank loan, requiring (i) bidders (applicants/proposers),, consultants, contractors, and suppliers, and their sub-contractors, sub-consultants, service providers, suppliers, agents personnel, permit the Bank to inspect all accounts, records and other documents relating to the procurement process, selection and/or contract execution, and to have them audited by auditors appointed by the Bank.

 



Section 7:  Terms of Reference for 

RLLP Borrower Completion Report



Background

Ethiopia’s land resources are critical to the economic and social development of the country. There is thus an urgent need to reverse the current serious levels of land degradation through promoting and scaling up successful SLM technologies and approaches. However, this will require overcoming a number of major gaps, bottlenecks and barriers that have hindered the successful scaling up and mainstreaming of SLM within Ethiopia.

To address this challenge, the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (FDRE) introduced a range of reform initiatives including a flagship national Sustainable Land Management Program (SLMP) that includes a number of projects supporting its objectives. For the successful implementation of the Program, the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) established and hosted the national SLMP Coordination Unit (SLM-PCU). The SLMP is being financed by the World Bank (WB) and other development partners. The WB financing for the Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Project (RLLP) blends concessional lending from the WB Group’s International Development Association (IDA), and grants from Norway and Canada governments. 

The objective of RLLP is to improve climate resilience, land productivity and carbon storage, and increase access to diversified livelihood activities in selected rural watersheds in Ethiopia. The project covers 170 selected major watersheds in targeted nine regions in Ethiopia (Amhara, B.Gumuz, Central Ethiopia, Gambella, Oromia, Sidama, Southern Ethiopia, South West Ethiopia and Tigray). The objective would be achieved through the provision of capital investments, technical assistance and capacity building for small holder farmers in the watersheds and government institutions at national and sub-national levels. The project has been implemented under four components namely: The project has four components: (1) Green Infrastructure and Resilient Livelihoods, which supports the implementation of sustainable land and water management practices, the adoption of climate smart agriculture practices, and the promotion of livelihood-diversifying income generating activities; (2) Investing in Institutions and Information for Resilience, which builds capacity for the promotion and management of sustainable land and water management practices, and improves information for better decision-making; (3) Rural Land Administration and Use, which strengthens the rural land administration system that secures tenure rights, optimizes land use, and empowers land-users to sustainably invest in productive landscapes; and (4) Project Management and Reporting, which ensures effective planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of project activities.

The organizational structure for the implementation of RLLP (and the broader SLM program to which is contributes) comprises four levels -Federal, Regional, Woreda and Kebele. Overall responsibility for RLLP coordination and implementation at the federal level by the MoA through a Project Coordination Unit in the NRM Sector. 

The Program aims to undertake a comprehensive performance assessment against the set of Project objectives referencing the RFIs. The result from such robust evaluation will help to learn from and use the findings for similar future projects. The project is approaching its end-date July, 2024 and requires end term evaluation. Thus, MoA is seeking for a competent and well experienced consulting firm to deliver the RLLP Borrow Completion Report in the nine regions as a requirement of the project Borrow Completion report. The SLM Program has a good experience managing mid and end line evaluations. Both the BCR during SLMP-II and mid-term review for RLLP creates a good learning ground. 

Objectives of Borrow Completion Report 

The general objective of the Borrow Completion for the Ethiopian Resilient landscape project is to assess the achievements, challenges, and lessons learned from the implementation of the project. The specific objectives are to:

Provide a complete and systematic analysis of the performance and results of the project, 

Evaluate the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and impact of the project activities and outcomes.

Identify the best practices, lesson learnt and innovations that contributed to the success of the project.

Assess the compliance of the project with the environmental and social safeguards policies and standards.

Identify significant factors that positively or negatively affected the delivery of outcomes; 

Formulate a concrete and viable set of recommendations.

Methodology

The firm is expected to thoroughly review the terms of reference of the assignment to develop proper methodology before and during inception report preparation. The consulting firm is expected to come up with a methodology that best suits the assignments, combining the review of available data and field assessments and verification. These data sources to be provided by the Program Coordination Units at national and sub national levels include: 

Preliminary list of documents to be reviewed among others include:

Project Appraisal Document (PAD);

Project Implementation Manual (PIM);

Project Financing and Grant Agreements (original and amended versions);

Project restructuring documents and restructuring agreements;

Component Strategies/Manuals (e.g. CSA Manual)

Institutional arrangements for implementation (Platforms);

Project safeguards instruments, (Environmental and Social Management Framework, and any other related documents);

Annual work and budget plans (AWBP)

Procurement plans including procurement review and audit reports;

Project results framework (original and revised versions);

M&E System and Annual Progress Reports 

Joint Implementation Mission Aide Memoirs;

Minutes of meetings of the Steering Committee and Technical Committee; 

Other relevant minutes of project meetings 

Mid-term Review Report;

FMs reviews, Audit reports, disbursements

Reports on various consultancies relevant to RLLP;

A field visit to selected project sites and beneficiaries, covering all nine regions where the project is implemented. The field visit should aim to collect qualitative and quantitative data on the project outcomes, outputs, activities, and processes, as well as the challenges, lessons learned, and best practices. 

A stakeholder consultation with the relevant project partners, such as the Ministry of Agriculture , the regional bureaus of agriculture and natural resources, the World Bank task team, and other development partners involved in the project. The stakeholder consultation should seek to validate the findings from the desk review and the field visit, as well as to solicit feedback and recommendations for the future.

Focus group discussions with project beneficiaries and other stakeholders. The participants in the FGDs should be representative of the economic and social makeup of the micro-watersheds where the visit will be made.

Key informant interviews (KII) with stakeholders and implementing organizations at federal, regional, woreda and community levels, 

Select appropriate data analysis tools for type of the report generated

Major Tasks of the assignment

Conduct a desk review of relevant project documents and reports, as well as a field visit to selected project sites to collect primary data and validate secondary data. 

Consult with key project stakeholders, such as the implementing agencies, the World Bank team, the beneficiaries, and other partners. 

Assessment of the project’s objectives, design and implementation as well as detailed account of all activities undertaken during the project period and within the framework of the project components and sub-components; 

Determine the actual inputs, outputs and outcomes of the project by component and subcomponent, in general and by region, and in relation to the specified project goals and objectives;

Evaluation of efficiency of project management, including the delivery of outputs and activities in terms of quality, quantity, timeliness and cost efficiency;

An assessment of the project's relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and impact, using the standard criteria and methodology.

Summary of the most salient internal/external, positive/negative factors that impacted on the delivery/performance of the project;

Analyze the project results framework indicators (RFI) that are indicated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD).

Pay special attention to assess and examine the MTR period reviewed indicators specified as part of the Result Framework Indicators (RFI) of the Project Appraisal Document (PAD):

Assessment of sustainability of project activities and outcomes after the project’s closure;

Evaluation of the Project’s planning instruments, M&E System, and linkage to the Results Framework

Evaluation of performance of the Government as well as each of the project implementing agencies during the preparation and implementation processes of the project, with special emphasis on lessons learned that may be helpful in the future;

Evaluation of performance of the World Bank, any co-financiers, or Development Partners during the preparation and implementation of the project, including the effectiveness of their relationship, with special emphasis on lessons learned; 

Identification of key lessons learned that can inform future projects;

Compile and synthesis document on success stories and best practices in selected major watersheds and beneficiaries.

Based on the findings, formulate a concrete and viable set of recommendations that have the potential to enhance the design and implementation of the forthcoming RLLP project.

Key Thematic Areas for Analysis and Reporting

 Relevance and Strategic Fit 

This will involve an assessment and re-examination of relevance and strategic fit of project objectives, planned outputs, anticipated outcomes and impacts. The analyses of the relevance and strategic fit of the project will (among other things) be based on the following key criteria:

Socio-economic development needs and aspirations of direct and indirect beneficiaries,

Biophysical development needs and aspirations of Soil and Water Conservation (SWC) investment priorities

Alignment with existing legal and institutional arrangements

Alignment with priority policies, strategies and plans of national and regional governments; 

Alignment with World Bank priorities for Ethiopia

Alignment of strategies and plans of the implementing agencies as well as other relevant collaborating local and international development agencies;

Synergy/collaboration with other relevant projects;

Validity of Project Design

This will involve an assessment of project design (i.e., objectives, components, and organization) including its realism in terms of the degree of complexity (e.g., geographic dispersion of the project, number of project components and set of planned activities and outputs as well as anticipated outcomes, number of implementing organizations. target beneficiaries involved, capacity of implementing agencies etc.); as well as assessment of risks and mitigation measures. This will, among other things, be based on the following broad criteria:

Efficacy of the development model applied (i.e. the theory of change);

Adequacy of intervention mix and plausibility of causality of project objectives, planned activities and outputs, anticipated outcomes and impact;

Realism of project timeline;

Soundness of risk analyses and mitigation measures;

Mainstreaming and equity strategies for gender/youth/marginalized and vulnerable groups. 

Project Performance and Effectiveness (Efficacy)

The assessment of project implementation performance will, among other things, entail the following tasks:

a) Detailed and systematic quantitative and qualitative account of project performance (by components, regions and implementing agencies) against the set achievement output and outcome targets as provided for in the overall results framework of the project, and against work plans of each under each component and by implementing agencies. This will involve but not limited to the following:

Assessment of project outcomes, based on how they were defined in the PAD and restructuring paper (with specific reference to the project’s results framework); 

Assess the project outputs by component and their contribution to the PDO outcomes; 

Assessment (through beneficiary survey if applicable) of perceptions of the stakeholders regarding project outcomes;

Assessment and analysis of key environmental and social safeguard and fiduciary (procurement and financial management) issues, compliance with the policy and procedural requirements, and any issues that arose and their resolution. b) Assessment of institutional performance during project preparation and implementation including:

The World Bank;

The Government including national and regional governments in fulfilling their designated mandates including: 

General implementation and management of project components in terms of quantity and quality of inputs and activities delivered, 

Development and adherence to work plans and budgets; 

Compliance with the Financing and Grant Agreements, and the various other agreements signed in respect of the implementation of the Project; 

Adequacy of management structures and arrangements as well as monitoring and backstopping support to the Project by all parties concerned. 

The Project Support Unit (PCU) and other management structures within the RLLP implementing agencies and their administration. 

Assessment of functionality organizational/institutional platforms (National, Regional and Local) 

Assessment of co-operation amongst Project partners and implementing agencies;

c) Overarching themes and other outcomes - 

Poverty impacts, gender and youth aspects, and social development: Assess the project’s positive and negative effects on the population or its subgroups (including intended and unexpected).

Institutional change/strengthening: To the extent not previously covered, if any, assess SLMP’s effect and impacts (intended or unintended, positive or negative) on institutional development, particularly longer-term development of the country’s capacity and institutions. 

d) Analysis of key internal/external and positive/negative factors which may affected progress of project implementation and achievement of planned outputs and anticipated outcomes including:

Administrative, operational and/or technical issues and constraints that influenced the effective implementation of the Project; 

Extent of support from ultimate target beneficiaries (communities) in the adoption and integration of RLLP interventions;

Effects of past restructurings or other significant changes (including cancellation of funding) in terms of their causes, rationale, effectiveness and consequences;

Effects of implementation or non-implementation of recommendations of the mid-term review;

Support or non-support of financing agencies or any other collaborating agencies;

Actions taken by project management, and timeliness, in response to any emerging problems/challenges and how they were resolved;

e) Relevance, coverage and effectiveness of technical assistance and training provided to project beneficiaries and staff and the extent to which they were based on needs assessment as well as the extent to which they were followed up to assess the impact;

f) Analysis of project interventions, in terms of actual or potential positive impact towards attainment of anticipated outcomes and overall objective; 

5.4. Effectiveness of Project Management and Implementation Arrangements	

Analysis in this regard will include the following among other things:

Effectiveness of organizational, administrative and governance arrangements of the project 

Coordination and collaboration within and between implementing agencies, and with regional agencies;

Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) issues including:

Design and use of the M&E framework and systems – including the extent to which relevant baseline data, adequate and appropriate performance indicators were identified to monitor progress towards the Indicators and the PDO

Effectiveness of the M&E system adopted, information/data collection methods;

Effectiveness and efficiency of implementation of the M&E functions – including the extent to which appropriate data was collected using appropriate collection methods (to ensure data quality); 

Quality and reliability of M&E performance data/information used (evidence);

Reliability and realism of planned achievement targets;

Regularity of M&E functions of the project and degree of involvement of stakeholders;

Appropriateness and effectiveness of knowledge management, information sharing/dissemination and communication within the project components; and between the project and other stakeholders – including implementing agencies; beneficiaries and financing agencies;

Effectiveness of utilization of M&E data/information for improved project implementation and management – including the extent to which such data/information was utilized to inform decision-making and resource allocation towards improved performance of the project;

Existence of systems for risk analysis, assessment and management – including mitigation measures undertaken and effects; 

5.5. Efficiency of Resource Use 

This will entail analyses of project resource issues including but not limited to the following:

Human and non-human (physical) resources – including adequacy and quality;

financial issues during the life of the project - including compliance with the Government and DP policies and procedures as described in the FA, timeliness of disbursements, procurement procedures and timeliness, absorption of funds, effectiveness and efficiency-which will include discussion on whether costs involved in achieving the project objectives were reasonable in comparison with both the benefits and recognized norms, and whether the balance between expenditures on administrative and overhead charges in relation to those on the achievement of substantive outputs was adequate and appropriate; auditing and accounting systems; 

Ex-post economic and financial analysis, as compared to the analysis conducted as part of project design

5.6 Impact Orientation and Sustainability of Project Activities

This will involve assessment of impact (actual or emerging/impact-orientation) and sustainability of project activities based on the analysis of the following issues:

a) Impact Orientation 

This will involve analysis of overarching themes and other outcomes covering but not limited to the following: 

Assessment of actual (if any) and orientation of impact on poverty, gender aspects, and social development: 

Assess projects positive and negative effects on the population or its subgroups (including intended and unintended outcomes/impacts).

Assessment of institutional changes/strengthening – and to the extent not previously covered (if any), discuss the RLLP effect and impacts (intended or unintended, positive or negative) on institutional development, particularly longer-term development of the country and the capacity of institutions. 

Assessment of other unintended outcomes and impacts- and to the extent not previously covered (if any), discuss other outcomes and impacts that were not intended, whether positive or negative

5.7 Sustainability (Risk to Outcomes)

This will include but not limited to the analyses of issues related to the following: 

Degree of ownership and support from the local communities and national and regional governments; 

Capacity of local institutions and communities supported to extend project benefits without external support;

Synergy and harmonization with other national, regional and local initiatives;

Financing commitment on the part of the donors, the national government as well as the county government and local communities; 

Behavioral change of the beneficiary communities. 

Existence of clear and sound clear exit strategy and plan

Lessons Learned, Success Stories and Best Practices Identification and Documentation

For lessons learned (which are useful towards informing future similar initiatives), the aim will be to bring out as clearly as possible, the challenges faced by the project (internal and external) and answer the following questions:

What good practices were observed during project implementation?

What should have been different?

What should be avoided in future? 

In distilling key lessons learned, the aim will be to analyse and describe as clearly as possible the following:

 What worked well and why?

This will involve identification and documentation of success stories, best practices and the key underlying reasons for knowledge sharing among SLMP stakeholders and other interested parties.

What did not work well and why? 

This will involve identification of failure or poorly performing cases and identification of the underpinning factors, also purposes of knowledge sharing among SLMP stakeholders and other interested parties. 

Conclusions & Recommendations

Based on detailed analysis of findings and observations during literature review, field work and other processes of the assignment, the aim will be to provide concise, objective and informed conclusions regarding the performance of the project since inception, and performance by components, implementing agencies, GOE, the World Bank and other relevant stakeholders.

Recommendations will be based on thorough and objective analysis of all aspects of project and challenges faced (if any), in order to make relevant recommendations not only for future similar projects, but also how such challenges (if any) could have been avoided or overcome. 

Firm Qualifications and Team Composition 

To meet the objectives of this assignment, it is recommended that the consultancy assignment would be carried out by a firm or firms with a wide variety of proven professional expertise on all the topics mentioned above and good knowledge of local conditions. The firm preferably expected to work out the experience in sustainable land management issues in Ethiopia and or abroad. The firm should have ten years’ experience, previous work in evaluation of NRM and/or rural development sectors.









Qualification of Personnel:

No.

Position

Qualification

Core Team



1







Project Management Specialist & Team leader (All components with special focus on component 4, and economic analysis)

Minimum of M.Sc. in development sciences, economics, agricultural economics or natural resources related fields. at least 10 years of experience in leading large project midterm or completion report, M & E system development, feasibility studies and evaluations of development programs/projects; long years of experience in leading and managing multi-disciplinary study teams in natural resources development and management and related fields. Experience in Ethiopia is an advantage

22

Agricultural Economist (Focus on all components with special for agricultural economic analysis)

Minimum of M.Sc. in economics, agricultural economics, environment economics or related fields of at least 10 years of experience in large project midterm or completion report, M & E system development, feasibility studies, evaluations and analysis of development programs/projects; 10 years of experience in economic and financial analysis with multi-disciplinary study teams in natural resources development and management and related fields. Experience in Ethiopia is an advantage.

3

Natural Resources Management Specialist (Component 1)

Minimum of M.Sc. in Natural Resource Management, Watershed development, Agriculture and related fields. At least 10 years of specialization in natural resources management project funded by World Bank and/or other multilateral/international funding agencies focused on watershed, land and water resources management, or forest/agriculture landscape management, demonstrated experience in project development/design including knowledge of project planning cycle focused on natural resources management; and specialization and/or experience on development projects identification, design, implementation and management focused on natural resources management preferably in Ethiopia.

4

Institutional & Capacity Building Specialist (Cross-cutting & Component 2)

Minimum of M.Sc. in business administration, public administration, agricultural economics, economics, or another relevant discipline. At least 10 years of experience in institutional development, Experience in the evaluation of institutional frameworks, experience designing capacity building events preferably in Ethiopia.

5

Land administration specialist (Component 3)

Minimum of M.Sc. in land administration and use and related fields. Minimum of 10 years of experience in Land Administration Law, implementation of procedural regulations in land tenure and property rights including research, land administration planning and design, implementation oversight, demonstrated experience in leading strategic and operational land use planning preferably in Ethiopia.



Additional Team Members



6

Environmental & social safeguards 

Minimum of M.Sc in a relevant field such as Environmental science, Natural Resource management, Sociology, Anthropology, Rural development, or other related fields. Minimum of 10 years relevant operational experience and proven track record covering a broad range of environmental and social development issues preferably in Ethiopia.

7

Procurement and/or financial management

Minimum of M.Sc in accounting and/or procurement management project funded by World Bank and/or other multilateral/international funding agencies focused on watershed, land and water resources management. At least 10 years of experience in demonstrated experience in overall financial and or procurement management aspects of the project preferably in Ethiopia.  

8

Field Surveyors (for one month)

B.Sc. in Statistics, agricultural economics, Rural development and related agriculture fields. Minimum of 2 years of experience in field survey. Experience in agricultural production and comprehensive rural survey methodologies and techniques is important.



Schematic Representation of the Assignment

The Figure below depicts a schematic representation of the proposed activities to be undertaken during the implementation of the assignment in each of the phases to be submitted by the consulting firm as part of the inception report:



Task

Timing

Deliverables/Remarks

Phase I

Dates



Contract signing

March 01, 2024

Contract document

Desk review of key documents & reports

March 16, 2024

Review Notes

Preparation of the Inception Report (IR), data tools and instruments, and field visit plan

IR and Data Tools and Instruments

Submission of the Inception Report (IR)

Presentation of the Inception Report (IR)

Presentation of IR by Consultants

Presentations on the Status by Components

Presentations by Component Heads

Phases II & III





Preparations for field visits - logistics and appointments

May 15, 2024

Field itinerary and logistics completed 

Travel to representative Woredas/watersheds in all six regions

Logistics completed

Key stakeholder interviews, consultations and field visits

Field visits completed

Data analysis/Report writing

Draft Report

Submission of Draft Report

June 30, 2024

Review by MoA/PCU

MoA/PCU Comments

Revision of Draft report/Preparation of Final report

Comments by MoA/PCU and World Bank



Final Report

Submission of Final Report

June 20, 2024



Kick-off/Inception meeting with the Client - 

Desk review of relevant documents and initial consultation with key stakeholders -

Preparation of data collection tools and instruments - 



Review and approval by PCU

Preparation and presentation of the Inception Report (IR) to PCU and World Bank 



Review and approval by PCU 



Data Collection and field trips

Data entry, collation and analysis

Phase I

Phase II

Compilation of the Draft Report I

Presentation of Draft Report II to Stakeholder’s 

Review by the World Bank

Final Report

Phase III

Review and Comments by SLMP PCU 

Incorporation of comments and compilation of Draft Report II 

MAIN DELIVERABLES 

The main deliverables of the assignment shall include:

a)	Inception report comprising the following;

Background and context of the Project;

A comprehensive description of the consultant’s understanding of the Terms of Reference identifying any major inconsistency or deficiency in the TORs and proposed amendments;

A detailed methodology for the BCR and documentation;

Work Plan; 

Team organization and responsibilities;  

A proposal for the final report layout

b)	Draft Report (Borrow Completion Report and success stories)-which will comprise the analysis as per the key thematic areas and other aspects of project evaluation as per the TORs, key findings, lessons learned recommendations. 

The report will be discussed with the PCU and project implementing agencies for feedback and comments which will be incorporated into the report by the consultant. The draft report will be presented to the National Technical Committee for review and comments. After this, the consultant will present the report to the project National Steering Committee (NSC) and the World Bank.

iii)	The final report (Borrow Completion Report and success stories). The final report will be presented to the Technical Committee and the National Steering Committee for endorsement. It shall be submitted in hard copies and electronic version.

Support/Facilities to be provided by Client

	As per the general and specific conditions of contract agreement.

Facilities to be provided by the Consultant

As per the general and specific conditions of contract agreement.





KEY PARAMETERS TO BE CONSIDERED DURING METHODOLOGY DESIGN, REPORT OUTLINE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS

Project Context and Development Objectives	

Context at approval

Context 

Theory of Change

Project Development Objectives 

Expected Outcomes and Outcome Indicators

Project Components

Significant changes during implementation (including restructurings)

Assessment of Project Implementation (Qualitative and Quantitative)

Assessment of Overall Project Coverage (Critical Watersheds and micro watersheds)

Assessment of Project Beneficiaries

Inputs and Outputs by Component and Subcomponent

Inputs and Outputs by Region

Institutional Aspects (Platform Functionality at all levels)

Capacity Building & Training	

Project Outcomes	

A. Relevance of PDOs	

B. Achievement of PDOs (efficacy)	

C. Efficiency

Economic and financial analysis

Use of resources

Other outcomes and impacts 

Gender and youth

Institutional strengthening

Poverty reduction

Other unintended outcomes and impacts	

Key factors that affected implementation and outcomes	

A. Key factors during preparation

B. Key factors during implementation	

Quality of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)

M&E Design

M&E Implementation

M&E Utilization

Environmental, Social, And Fiduciary (Procurement & FM) Compliance	

Borrower & Bank Performance	

Risk to Development Outcome (Sustainability)	

Lessons Learned and Recommendations

Annexes	

Annex 1. Assessment of results framework and key outputs		

Annex 2. Project cost by component and procurement and disbursement categories 	

Annex 3. Economic analysis

Other annexes (Methodology, publications/documents reviewed, list of people interviewed, etc.)	

Separate Success Story and Best Practice Documentation Report (Outline will be developed and presented by the consulting firm, as part of the inception report)





Time Lines and payment structure  



Reporting Requirement

Time Schedule

% of payment

Inception Report

14 days after commencement

20%

Draft Report

1 month after commencement

20%

Submission of the Final Report to the NPCU

1 month after commencement

30%

Presentation of the Final Report to the NPCU and incorporation of comments and finalization

1 month after commencement

30%



Support/Facilities to be provided by Client

As per the general and specific conditions of contract agreement.

Facilities to be provided by the Consultant

As per the general and specific conditions of contract agreement.

Supervision Responsibility	



The consulting firm shall be communicate to the NPCU Coordinator and will work closely with the RLLP staff in the execution and delivery of this consultancy. 













































Contract for Consultant’s Services



Lump-Sum







Project Name: Resilient Landscapes and Livelihood Project 



Credit No.: - IDA 6312-ET



Contract No: ET-MOALR-383056-CS-QCBS 



between





   Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)

Resilient Landscapes and Livelihood Project (RLLP) Coordination Unit









and













	

[Name of the Consultant]











Dated:  	













TABLE OF CONTENTS



I.	Form of Contract	83

II.	General Conditions of Contract	87

A.  General Provisions	87

1.	Definitions	87

2.	Relationship between the Parties	89

3.	Law Governing Contract	89

4.	Language	89

5.	Headings	89

6.	Communications	90

7.	Location	90

8.	Authority of Member in Charge	90

9.	Authorized Representatives	90

10.	Fraud and Corruption	90

B.  Commencement, Completion, Modification and Termination of Contract	91

11.	Effectiveness of Contract	91

12.	Termination of Contract for Failure to Become Effective	91

13.	Commencement of Services	91

14.	Expiration of Contract	91

15.	Entire Agreement	91

16.	Modifications or Variations	91

17.	Force Majeure	91

18.	Suspension	93

19.	Termination	93

C.  Obligations of the Consultant	95

20.	General	95

21.	Conflict of Interest	96

22.	Confidentiality	97

23.	Liability of the Consultant	97

24.	Insurance to be taken out by the Consultant	98

25.	Accounting, Inspection and Auditing	98

26.	Reporting Obligations	98

27.	Proprietary Rights of the Client in Reports and Records	98

28.	Equipment, Vehicles and Materials	99

29.	Code of Conduct	99

D.  Consultant’s Experts and Sub-Consultants	100

30.	Description of Key Experts	100

31.	Replacement of Key Experts	100

32.	Removal of Experts or Sub-consultants	100

E.  Obligations of the Client	101

33.	Assistance and Exemptions	101

34.	Access to Project Site	102

35.	Change in the Applicable Law Related to Taxes and Duties	102

36.	Services, Facilities and Property of the Client	102

37.	Counterpart Personnel	102

38.	Payment Obligation	102

F.  Payments to the Consultant	103

39.	Contract Price	103

40.	Taxes and Duties	103

41.	Currency of Payment	103

42.	Mode of Billing and Payment	103

43.	Interest on Delayed Payments	104

G.  Fairness and Good Faith	104

44.	Good Faith	104

H.  Settlement of Disputes	104

45.	Amicable Settlement	104

46.	Dispute Resolution	105

III.	Special Conditions of Contract	109

IV.	Appendices	117

Appendix A – Terms of Reference	117

Appendix B - Key Experts	117

Appendix C – Breakdown of Contract Price	117

Appendix D - Form of Advance Payments Guarantee	120

Appendix E - Code of Conduct (ES)	122









	





Form of Contract

Lump-Sum



(Text in brackets [ ] is optional; all notes should be deleted in the final text)





This CONTRACT (hereinafter called the “Contract”) is made the [number] day of the month of [month], [year], between, on the one hand, [name of Client or Recipient] (hereinafter called the “Client”) and, on the other hand, [name of Consultant] (hereinafter called the “Consultant”).



[If the Consultant consist of more than one entity, the above should be partially amended to read as follows: “…(hereinafter called the “Client”) and, on the other hand, a Joint Venture (name of the JV) consisting of the following entities, each member of which will be jointly and severally liable to the Client for all the Consultant’s obligations under this Contract, namely, [name of member] and [name of member] (hereinafter called the “Consultant”).]



WHEREAS



(a)	the Client has requested the Consultant to provide certain consulting services as defined in this Contract (hereinafter called the “Services”);



(b)	the Consultant, having represented to the Client that it has the required professional skills, expertise and technical resources, has agreed to provide the Services on the terms and conditions set forth in this Contract;



(c)	the Client has received [or has applied for] a loan [or credit or grant] from the [insert as relevant, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) or International Development Association (IDA)]: toward the cost of the Services and intends to apply a portion of the proceeds of this [loan/credit/grant] to eligible payments under this Contract, it being understood that (i) payments by the Bank will be made only at the request of the Client and upon approval by the Bank; (ii) such payments will be subject, in all respects, to the terms and conditions of the [loan/financing/grant] agreement, including prohibitions of withdrawal from the [loan/credit/grant] account for the purpose of any payment to persons or entities, or for any import of goods, if such payment or import, to the knowledge of the Bank, is prohibited by the decision of the United Nations Security council taken under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations; and (iii) no party other than the Client shall derive any rights from the [loan/financing/grant] agreement or have any claim to the [loan/credit/grant] proceeds;



NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto hereby agree as follows:



1.	The following documents attached hereto shall be deemed to form an integral part of this Contract:



(a)	The General Conditions of Contract (including Attachment 1 “Fraud and Corruption”);

(b)	The Special Conditions of Contract;

(c)	Appendices:  



Appendix A:	Terms of Reference	

Appendix B:	Key Experts	

Appendix C:	Breakdown of Contract Price	

Appendix D:	Form of Advance Payments Guarantee

Appendix E	Code of Conduct (ES) [Note to Client: to be included for supervision of infrastructure contracts (such as Plant or Works) and for other consulting service where the social risks are substantial or high]



In the event of any inconsistency between the documents, the following order of precedence shall prevail: the Special Conditions of Contract; the General Conditions of Contract, including Attachment 1; Appendix A; Appendix B; Appendix C; Appendix D; and Appendix E [Note to Client: to be included for supervision of infrastructure (such as Plant or Works) contracts and for other consulting service where the social risks are substantial or high]. Any reference to this Contract shall include, where the context permits, a reference to its Appendices.



2.	The mutual rights and obligations of the Client and the Consultant shall be as set forth in the Contract, in particular:



(a)	the Consultant shall carry out the Services in accordance with the provisions of the Contract; and

(b)	the Client shall make payments to the Consultant in accordance with the provisions of the Contract.





IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have caused this Contract to be signed in their respective names as of the day and year first above written.



For and on behalf of [Name of Client]



	

[Authorized Representative of the Client – name, title and signature]



For and on behalf of [Name of Consultant or Name of a Joint Venture]



	

[Authorized Representative of the Consultant – name and signature]



[For a joint venture, either all members shall sign or only the lead member, in which case the power of attorney to sign on behalf of all members shall be attached. 



For and on behalf of each of the members of the Consultant [insert the Name of the Joint Venture]



[Name of the lead member]



	

[Authorized Representative on behalf of a Joint Venture]



[add signature blocks for each member if all are signing]







General Conditions of Contract

A.  General Provisions 

Definitions



Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms whenever used in this Contract have the following meanings:

“Applicable Law” means the laws and any other instruments having the force of law in the Client’s country, or in such other country as may be specified in the Special Conditions of Contract (SCC), as they may be issued and in force from time to time.

“Bank” means the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) or the International Development Association (IDA).

“Borrower” means the Government, Government agency or other entity that signs the financing agreement with the Bank.

“Client” means the implementing agency that signs the Contract for the Services with the Selected Consultant.

Client’s Personnel” refers to the staff, labor and other employees (if any) of the Client engaged in fulfilling the Client’s obligations under the Contract; and any other personnel identified as Client’s Personnel, by a notice from the Client to the Consultant.

 “Consultant” means a legally-established professional consulting firm or entity selected by the Client to provide the Services under the signed Contract.

“Contract” means the legally binding written agreement signed between the Client and the Consultant and which includes all the attached documents listed in its paragraph 1 of the Form of Contract (the General Conditions (GCC), the Special Conditions (SCC), and the Appendices).

 “Contractor” means the person named as contractor in the contract to be supervised by the Consultant (if applicable).

“Contractor’s Personnel” means personnel whom the Contractor utilizes in the execution of its contract, including the staff, labor and other employees of the Contractor and each subcontractor; and any other personnel assisting the Contractor in the execution of the contract to be supervised by the Consultant (if applicable).

“Day” means a working day unless indicated otherwise.

“ES” means environmental and social (including Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and Sexual Harassment (SH).

“Effective Date” means the date on which this Contract comes into force and effect pursuant to Clause GCC 11.

 “Experts” means, collectively, Key Experts, Non-Key Experts, or any other personnel of the Consultant, Sub-consultant or JV member(s) assigned by the Consultant to perform the Services or any part thereof under the Contract.

“Foreign Currency” means any currency other than the currency of the Client’s country.

“GCC” means these General Conditions of Contract.

“Government” means the government of the Client’s country.

“Joint Venture (JV)” means an association with or without a legal personality distinct from that of its members, of more than one entity where one member has the authority to conduct all businesses for and on behalf of any and all the members of the JV, and where the members of the JV are jointly and severally liable to the Client for the performance of the Contract.

“Key Expert(s)” means an individual professional whose skills, qualifications, knowledge and experience are critical to the performance of the Services under the Contract and whose Curricula Vitae (CV) was taken into account in the technical evaluation of the Consultant’s proposal. 

“Local Currency” means the currency of the Client’s country.

“Non-Key Expert(s)” means an individual professional provided by the Consultant or its Sub-consultant to perform the Services or any part thereof under the Contract.

 “Party” means the Client or the Consultant, as the case may be, and “Parties” means both of them.

 “SCC” means the Special Conditions of Contract by which the GCC may be amended or supplemented but not over-written.

“Services” means the work to be performed by the Consultant pursuant to this Contract, as described in Appendix A hereto.

“Sexual Exploitation and Abuse” “(SEA)” means the following:

Sexual Exploitation is defined as any actual or attempted abuse of position of vulnerability, differential power or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily, socially or politically from the sexual exploitation of another.  

Sexual Abuse is defined as the actual or threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under unequal or coercive conditions.

“Sexual Harassment” “(SH)” is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature by the Experts with other Experts, Contractor’s (if applicable) or Client’s Personnel.

“Site” (if applicable) means the land and other places where Works are to be executed or facilities to be installed, and such other land or places as may be specified in the Contractor’s Contract as forming part of the Site.

“Sub-consultants” means an entity to whom/which the Consultant subcontracts any part of the Services while remaining solely liable for the execution of the Contract.

“Third Party” means any person or entity other than the Government, the Client, the Consultant or a Sub-consultant.

Relationship between the Parties

Nothing contained herein shall be construed as establishing a relationship of master and servant or of principal and agent as between the Client and the Consultant.  The Consultant, subject to this Contract, has complete charge of the Experts and Sub-consultants, if any, performing the Services and shall be fully responsible for the Services performed by them or on their behalf hereunder.

Law Governing Contract

This Contract, its meaning and interpretation, and the relation between the Parties shall be governed by the Applicable Law.

Language

This Contract has been executed in the language specified in the SCC, which shall be the binding and controlling language for all matters relating to the meaning or interpretation of this Contract.

Headings

The headings shall not limit, alter or affect the meaning of this Contract.

Communications

Any communication required or permitted to be given or made pursuant to this Contract shall be in writing in the language specified in Clause GCC 4. Any such notice, request or consent shall be deemed to have been given or made when delivered in person to an authorized representative of the Party to whom the communication is addressed, or when sent to such Party at the address specified in the SCC. 

A Party may change its address for notice hereunder by giving the other Party any communication of such change to the address specified in the SCC.

Location

The Services shall be performed at such locations as are specified in Appendix A hereto and, where the location of a particular task is not so specified, at such locations, whether in the Government’s country or elsewhere, as the Client may approve.

Authority of Member in Charge

In case the Consultant is a Joint Venture, the members hereby authorize the member specified in the SCC to act on their behalf in exercising all the Consultant’s rights and obligations towards the Client under this Contract, including without limitation the receiving of instructions and payments from the Client.

Authorized Representatives

Any action required or permitted to be taken, and any document required or permitted to be executed under this Contract by the Client or the Consultant may be taken or executed by the officials specified in the SCC.

Fraud and Corruption 

The Bank requires compliance with the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines and its prevailing sanctions policies and procedures as set forth in the Bank’s Sanctions Framework, as set forth in Attachment 1 to the GCC.

a.	Commissions and Fees

The Client requires the Consultant to disclose any commissions, gratuities or fees that may have been paid or are to be paid to agents or any other party with respect to the selection process or execution of the Contract.  The information disclosed must include at least the name and address of the agent or other party, the amount and currency, and the purpose of the commission, gratuity or fee. Failure to disclose such commissions, gratuities or fees may result in termination of the Contract and/or sanctions by the Bank.

B.  Commencement, Completion, Modification and Termination of Contract

Effectiveness of Contract

This Contract shall come into force and effect on the date (the “Effective Date”) of the Client’s notice to the Consultant instructing the Consultant to begin carrying out the Services.  This notice shall confirm that the effectiveness conditions, if any, listed in the SCC have been met.

Termination of Contract for Failure to Become Effective

If this Contract has not become effective within such time period after the date of Contract signature as specified in the SCC, either Party may, by not less than twenty two (22) days written notice to the other Party, declare this Contract to be null and void, and in the event of such a declaration by either Party, neither Party shall have any claim against the other Party with respect hereto.

Commencement of Services

The Consultant shall confirm availability of Key Experts and begin carrying out the Services not later than the number of days after the Effective Date specified in the SCC.

Expiration of Contract

Unless terminated earlier pursuant to Clause GCC 19 hereof, this Contract shall expire at the end of such time period after the Effective Date as specified in the SCC.

Entire Agreement

This Contract contains all covenants, stipulations and provisions agreed by the Parties.  No agent or representative of either Party has authority to make, and the Parties shall not be bound by or be liable for, any statement, representation, promise or agreement not set forth herein.

Modifications or Variations

Any modification or variation of the terms and conditions of this Contract, including any modification or variation of the scope of the Services, may only be made by written agreement between the Parties. However, each Party shall give due consideration to any proposals for modification or variation made by the other Party.

In cases of substantial modifications or variations, the prior written consent of the Bank is required.

Force Majeure



a.	Definition

For the purposes of this Contract, “Force Majeure” means an event which is beyond the reasonable control of a Party, is not foreseeable, is unavoidable, and makes a Party’s performance of its obligations hereunder impossible or so impractical as reasonably to be considered impossible under the circumstances, and subject to those requirements, includes, but is not limited to, war, riots, civil disorder, earthquake, fire, explosion, storm, flood or other adverse weather conditions, strikes, lockouts or other industrial action confiscation or any other action by Government agencies.

Force Majeure shall not include (i) any event which is caused by the negligence or intentional action of a Party or such Party’s Experts, Sub-consultants or agents or employees, nor (ii) any event which a diligent Party could reasonably have been expected to both take into account at the time of the conclusion of this Contract, and avoid or overcome in the carrying out of its obligations hereunder.

Force Majeure shall not include insufficiency of funds or failure to make any payment required hereunder.

b.	No Breach of Contract

The failure of a Party to fulfill any of its obligations hereunder shall not be considered to be a breach of, or default under, this Contract insofar as such inability arises from an event of Force Majeure, provided that the Party affected by such an event has taken all reasonable precautions, due care and reasonable alternative measures, all with the objective of carrying out the terms and conditions of this Contract. 

c.	Measures to be Taken

A Party affected by an event of Force Majeure shall continue to perform its obligations under the Contract as far as is reasonably practical, and shall take all reasonable measures to minimize the consequences of any event of Force Majeure.

A Party affected by an event of Force Majeure shall notify the other Party of such event as soon as possible, and in any case not later than fourteen (14) calendar days following the occurrence of such event, providing evidence of the nature and cause of such event, and shall similarly give written notice of the restoration of normal conditions as soon as possible.

Any period within which a Party shall, pursuant to this Contract, complete any action or task, shall be extended for a period equal to the time during which such Party was unable to perform such action as a result of Force Majeure.

During the period of their inability to perform the Services as a result of an event of Force Majeure, the Consultant, upon instructions by the Client, shall either:

(a)	demobilize, in which case the Consultant shall be reimbursed for additional costs they reasonably and necessarily incurred, and, if required by the Client, in reactivating the Services; or

(b)	continue with the Services to the extent reasonably possible, in which case the Consultant shall continue to be paid under the terms of this Contract and be reimbursed for additional costs reasonably and necessarily incurred.

In the case of disagreement between the Parties as to the existence or extent of Force Majeure, the matter shall be settled according to Clauses GCC 45 & 46.

Suspension

The Client may, by written notice of suspension to the Consultant, suspend part or all payments to the Consultant hereunder if the Consultant fails to perform any of its obligations under this Contract, including the carrying out of the Services, provided that such notice of suspension (i) shall specify the nature of the failure, and (ii) shall request the Consultant to remedy such failure within a period not exceeding thirty (30) calendar days after receipt by the Consultant of such notice of suspension.

Termination

This Contract may be terminated by either Party as per provisions set up below:     

a.	By the Client

19.1.1. The Client may terminate this Contract in case of the occurrence of any of the events specified in paragraphs (a) through (f) of this Clause. In such an occurrence the Client shall give at least thirty (30) calendar days’ written notice of termination to the Consultant in case of the events referred to in (a) through (d); at least sixty (60) calendar days’ written notice in case of the event referred to in (e); and at least five (5) calendar days’ written notice in case of the event referred to in (f):

If the Consultant fails to remedy a failure in the performance of its obligations hereunder, as specified in a notice of suspension pursuant to Clause GCC 18; 

If the Consultant becomes (or, if the Consultant consists of more than one entity, if any of its members becomes) insolvent or bankrupt or enter into any agreements with their creditors for relief of debt or take advantage of any law for the benefit of debtors or go into liquidation or receivership whether compulsory or voluntary;

If the Consultant fails to comply with any final decision reached as a result of arbitration proceedings pursuant to Clause GCC 46.1;

If, as the result of Force Majeure, the Consultant is unable to perform a material portion of the Services for a period of not less than sixty (60) calendar days;

If the Client, in its sole discretion and for any reason whatsoever, decides to terminate this Contract;

If the Consultant fails to confirm availability of Key Experts as required in Clause GCC 13.

19.1.2.	Furthermore, if the Client determines that the Consultant has engaged in Fraud and Corruption in competing for or in executing the Contract, then the Client may, after giving fourteen (14) calendar days written notice to the Consultant, terminate the Consultant's employment under the Contract. 

b.	By the Consultant

19.1.3.	The Consultant may terminate this Contract, by not less than thirty (30) calendar days’ written notice to the Client, in case of the occurrence of any of the events specified in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this Clause.

If the Client fails to pay any money due to the Consultant pursuant to this Contract and not subject to dispute pursuant to Clause GCC 45.1 within forty-five (45) calendar days after receiving written notice from the Consultant that such payment is overdue.

If, as the result of Force Majeure, the Consultant is unable to perform a material portion of the Services for a period of not less than sixty (60) calendar days.

If the Client fails to comply with any final decision reached as a result of arbitration pursuant to Clause GCC 46.1.

If the Client is in material breach of its obligations pursuant to this Contract and has not remedied the same within forty-five (45) days (or such longer period as the Consultant may have subsequently approved in writing) following the receipt by the Client of the Consultant’s notice specifying such breach.

c.	Cessation of Rights and Obligations

19.1.4.	Upon termination of this Contract pursuant to Clauses GCC 12 or GCC 19 hereof, or upon expiration of this Contract pursuant to Clause GCC 14, all rights and obligations of the Parties hereunder shall cease, except (i) such rights and obligations as may have accrued on the date of termination or expiration, (ii) the obligation of confidentiality set forth in Clause GCC 22, (iii) the Consultant’s obligation to permit inspection, copying and auditing of their accounts and records set forth in Clause GCC 25 and to cooperate and assist in any inspection or investigation, and (iv) any right which a Party may have under the Applicable Law.

d.	Cessation of Services

19.1.5.	Upon termination of this Contract by notice of either Party to the other pursuant to Clauses GCC 19a or GCC 19b, the Consultant shall, immediately upon dispatch or receipt of such notice, take all necessary steps to bring the Services to a close in a prompt and orderly manner and shall make every reasonable effort to keep expenditures for this purpose to a minimum. With respect to documents prepared by the Consultant and equipment and materials furnished by the Client, the Consultant shall proceed as provided, respectively, by Clauses GCC 27 or GCC 28.

e.	Payment upon Termination

19.1.6.	Upon termination of this Contract, the Client shall make the following payments to the Consultant:

payment for Services satisfactorily performed prior to the effective date of termination; and

in the case of termination pursuant to paragraphs (d) and (e) of Clause GCC 19.1.1, reimbursement of any reasonable cost incidental to the prompt and orderly termination of this Contract, including the cost of the return travel of the Experts.

C.  Obligations of the Consultant

General



a.	Standard of Performance

The Consultant shall perform the Services and carry out the Services with all due diligence, efficiency and economy, in accordance with generally accepted professional standards and practices, and shall observe sound management practices, and employ appropriate technology and safe and effective equipment, machinery, materials and methods. The Consultant shall always act, in respect of any matter relating to this Contract or to the Services, as a faithful adviser to the Client, and shall at all times support and safeguard the Client’s legitimate interests in any dealings with the third parties.

The Consultant shall employ and provide such qualified and experienced Experts and Sub-consultants as are required to carry out the Services.

The Consultant may subcontract part of the Services to an extent and with such Key Experts and Sub-consultants as may be approved in advance by the Client. Notwithstanding such approval, the Consultant shall retain full responsibility for the Services. 

b.	Law Applicable to Services



The Consultant shall perform the Services in accordance with the Contract and the Applicable Law and shall take all practicable steps to ensure that any of its Experts and Sub-consultants, comply with the Applicable Law.  

Throughout the execution of the Contract, the Consultant shall comply with the import of goods and services prohibitions in the Client’s country when 

as a matter of law or official regulations, the Borrower’s country prohibits commercial relations with that country; or 

by an act of compliance with a decision of the United Nations Security Council taken under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, the Borrower’s Country prohibits any import of goods from that country or any payments to any country, person, or entity in that country.

The Client shall notify the Consultant in writing of relevant local customs, and the Consultant shall, after such notification, respect such customs.

Conflict of Interest

The Consultant shall hold the Client’s interests paramount, without any consideration for future work, and strictly avoid conflict with other assignments or their own corporate interests.

a.	Consultant Not to Benefit from Commissions, Discounts, etc.

21.1.1	The payment of the Consultant pursuant to GCC F (Clauses GCC 39 through 43) shall constitute the Consultant’s only payment in connection with this Contract and, subject to Clause GCC 21.1.3, the Consultant shall not accept for its own benefit any trade commission, discount or similar payment in connection with activities pursuant to this Contract or in the discharge of its obligations hereunder, and the Consultant shall use its best efforts to ensure that any Sub-consultants, as well as the Experts and agents of either of them, similarly shall not receive any such additional payment.

21.1.2	Furthermore, if the Consultant, as part of the Services, has the responsibility of advising the Client on the procurement of goods, works or services, the Consultant shall comply with the Bank’s Applicable Regulations, and shall at all times exercise such responsibility in the best interest of the Client. Any discounts or commissions obtained by the Consultant in the exercise of such procurement responsibility shall be for the account of the Client.

b.	Consultant and Affiliates Not to Engage in Certain Activities

21.1.3	The Consultant agrees that, during the term of this Contract and after its termination, the Consultant and any entity affiliated with the Consultant, as well as any Sub-consultants and any entity affiliated with such Sub-consultants, shall be disqualified from providing goods, works or non-consulting services resulting from or directly related to the Consultant’s Services for the preparation or implementation of the project. 

c.	Prohibition of Conflicting Activities

21.1.4	The Consultant shall not engage, and shall cause its Experts as well as its Sub-consultants not to engage, either directly or indirectly, in any business or professional activities that would conflict with the activities assigned to them under this Contract.

d.	Strict Duty to Disclose Conflicting Activities

21.1.5	The Consultant has an obligation and shall ensure that its Experts and Sub-consultants shall have an obligation to disclose any situation of actual or potential conflict that impacts their capacity to serve the best interest of their Client, or that may reasonably be perceived as having this effect. Failure to disclose said situations may lead to the disqualification of the Consultant or the termination of its Contract.

Confidentiality

Except with the prior written consent of the Client, the Consultant and the Experts shall not at any time communicate to any person or entity any confidential information acquired in the course of the Services, nor shall the Consultant and the Experts make public the recommendations formulated in the course of, or as a result of, the Services.

Liability of the Consultant

Subject to additional provisions, if any, set forth in the SCC, the Consultant’s liability under this Contract shall be provided by the Applicable Law.

Insurance to be taken out by the Consultant

The Consultant (i) shall take out and maintain, and shall cause any Sub-consultants to take out and maintain, at its (or the Sub-consultants’, as the case may be) own cost but on terms and conditions approved by the Client, insurance against the risks, and for the coverage specified in the SCC, and (ii) at the Client’s request, shall provide evidence to the Client showing that such insurance has been taken out and maintained and that the current premiums therefore have been paid. The Consultant shall ensure that such insurance is in place prior to commencing the Services as stated in Clause GCC 13.

Accounting, Inspection and Auditing

The Consultant shall keep, and shall make all reasonable efforts to cause its Sub-consultants to keep, accurate and systematic accounts and records in respect of the Services and in such form and detail as will clearly identify relevant time changes and costs.

Pursuant to paragraph 2.2 e. of Attachment 1 to the General Conditions, the Consultant shall permit and shall cause its agents (where declared or not), subcontractors, subconsultants, service providers, suppliers, and personnel, to permit, the Bank and/or persons appointed by the Bank to inspect the site and/or the accounts, records and other documents relating to the procurement process, selection and/or contract execution, and to have such accounts, records and other documents audited by auditors appointed by the Bank. The Consultant’s and its Subcontractors’ and subconsultants’ attention is drawn to Sub-Clause 10.1 (Fraud and Corruption) which provides, inter alia, that acts intended to materially impede the exercise of the Bank’s inspection and audit rights constitute a prohibited practice subject to contract termination (as well as to a determination of ineligibility pursuant to the Bank’s prevailing sanctions procedures)..

Reporting Obligations

The Consultant shall submit to the Client the reports and documents specified in Appendix A, in the form, in the numbers and within the time periods set forth in the said Appendix.  

Proprietary Rights of the Client in Reports and Records

Unless otherwise indicated in the SCC, all reports and relevant data and information such as maps, diagrams, plans, databases, other documents and software, supporting records or material compiled or prepared by the Consultant for the Client in the course of the Services shall be confidential and become and remain the absolute property of the Client. The Consultant shall, not later than upon termination or expiration of this Contract, deliver all such documents to the Client, together with a detailed inventory thereof. The Consultant may retain a copy of such documents, data and/or software but shall not use the same for purposes unrelated to this Contract without prior written approval of the Client.  

If license agreements are necessary or appropriate between the Consultant and third parties for purposes of development of the plans, drawings, specifications, designs, databases, other documents and software, the Consultant shall obtain the Client’s prior written approval to such agreements, and the Client shall be entitled at its discretion to require recovering the expenses related to the development of the program(s) concerned.  Other restrictions about the future use of these documents and software, if any, shall be specified in the SCC.

Equipment, Vehicles and Materials 

Equipment, vehicles and materials made available to the Consultant by the Client, or purchased by the Consultant wholly or partly with funds provided by the Client, shall be the property of the Client and shall be marked accordingly.  Upon termination or expiration of this Contract, the Consultant shall make available to the Client an inventory of such equipment, vehicles and materials and shall dispose of such equipment, vehicles and materials in accordance with the Client’s instructions. While in possession of such equipment, vehicles and materials, the Consultant, unless otherwise instructed by the Client in writing, shall insure them at the expense of the Client in an amount equal to their full replacement value.

Any equipment or materials brought by the Consultant or its Experts into the Client’s country for the use either for the project or personal use shall remain the property of the Consultant or the Experts concerned, as applicable.

Code of Conduct

If specified in the SCC, the Consultant shall have a Code of Conduct for Experts (ES). 

The Consultant shall take all necessary measures to ensure that each Expert is made aware of the Code of Conduct including specific behaviors that are prohibited, and understands the consequences of engaging in such prohibited behaviors.  

These measures include providing instructions and documentation that can be understood by the Experts and seeking to obtain that person’s signature acknowledging receipt of such instructions and/or documentation, as appropriate.

The Consultant shall also ensure that the Code of Conduct is visibly displayed in locations where the Services are provided, including if applicable, on the Site, as well as in areas outside the Site accessible to the local community and project affected people. The posted Code of Conduct shall be provided in languages comprehensible to Experts, Contractor’s Personnel, Client’s Personnel and the local community if applicable.

D.  Consultant’s Experts and Sub-Consultants

Description of Key Experts

The title, agreed job description, minimum qualification and estimated period of engagement to carry out the Services of each of the Consultant’s Key Experts are described in Appendix B.  

Replacement of Key Experts

Except as the Client may otherwise agree in writing, no changes shall be made in the Key Experts. 

Notwithstanding the above, the substitution of Key Experts during Contract execution may be considered only based on the Consultant’s written request and due to circumstances outside the reasonable control of the Consultant, including but not limited to death or medical incapacity. In such case, the Consultant shall forthwith provide as a replacement, a person of equivalent or better qualifications and experience, and at the same rate of remuneration.

Removal of Experts or Sub-consultants

If the Client finds that any of the Experts or Sub-consultant has committed serious misconduct or has been charged with having committed a criminal action, or if the Client determines that a Consultant’s Expert or Sub-consultant has engaged in Fraud and Corruption while performing the Services, the Consultant shall, at the Client’s written request, provide a replacement.

In the event that any of Key Experts, Non-Key Experts or Sub-consultants is found by the Client to be incompetent or incapable in discharging assigned duties, the Client, specifying the grounds therefore, may request the Consultant to provide a replacement.

Any replacement of the removed Experts or Sub-consultants shall possess better qualifications and experience and shall be acceptable to the Client.

The Consultant shall bear all costs arising out of or incidental to any removal and/or replacement of such Experts.

E.  Obligations of the Client

Assistance and Exemptions

Unless otherwise specified in the SCC, the Client shall use its best efforts to:

Assist the Consultant with obtaining work permits and such other documents as shall be necessary to enable the Consultant to perform the Services.

Assist the Consultant with promptly obtaining, for the Experts and, if appropriate, their eligible dependents, all necessary entry and exit visas, residence permits, exchange permits and any other documents required for their stay in the Client’s country while carrying out the Services under the Contract.

Facilitate prompt clearance through customs of any property required for the Services and of the personal effects of the Experts and their eligible dependents.

Issue to officials, agents and representatives of the Government all such instructions and information as may be necessary or appropriate for the prompt and effective implementation of the Services.

Assist the Consultant and the Experts and any Sub-consultants employed by the Consultant for the Services with obtaining exemption from any requirement to register or obtain any permit to practice their profession or to establish themselves either individually or as a corporate entity in the Client’s country according to the applicable law in the Client’s country.

Assist the Consultant, any Sub-consultants and the Experts of either of them with obtaining the privilege, pursuant to the applicable law in the Client’s country, of bringing into the Client’s country reasonable amounts of foreign currency for the purposes of the Services or for the personal use of the Experts and of withdrawing any such amounts as may be earned therein by the Experts in the execution of the Services.

Provide to the Consultant any such other assistance as may be specified in the SCC.

Access to Project Site

The Client warrants that the Consultant shall have, free of charge, unimpeded access to the project site in respect of which access is required for the performance of the Services.  The Client will be responsible for any damage to the project site or any property thereon resulting from such access and will indemnify the Consultant and each of the experts in respect of liability for any such damage, unless such damage is caused by the willful default or negligence of the Consultant or any Sub-consultants or the Experts of either of them.

Change in the Applicable Law Related to Taxes and Duties

If, after the date of this Contract, there is any change in the applicable law in the Client’s country with respect to taxes and duties which increases or decreases the cost incurred by the Consultant in performing the Services, then the remuneration and reimbursable expenses otherwise payable to the Consultant under this Contract shall be increased or decreased accordingly by agreement between the Parties hereto, and corresponding adjustments shall be made to the Contract price  amount specified in Clause GCC 39.1 

Services, Facilities and Property of the Client

The Client shall make available to the Consultant and the Experts, for the purposes of the Services and free of any charge, the services, facilities and property described in the Terms of Reference (Appendix A) at the times and in the manner specified in said Appendix A.

Counterpart Personnel

The Client shall make available to the Consultant free of charge such professional and support counterpart personnel, to be nominated by the Client with the Consultant’s advice, if specified in Appendix A.

Professional and support counterpart personnel, excluding Client’s liaison personnel, shall work under the exclusive direction of the Consultant.  If any member of the counterpart personnel fails to perform adequately any work assigned to such member by the Consultant that is consistent with the position occupied by such member, the Consultant may request the replacement of such member, and the Client shall not unreasonably refuse to act upon such request.

Payment Obligation

In consideration of the Services performed by the Consultant under this Contract, the Client shall make such payments to the Consultant for the deliverables specified in Appendix A and in such manner as is provided by GCC F below.

F.  Payments to the Consultant

 Contract Price

The Contract price is fixed and is set forth in the SCC. The Contract price breakdown is provided in Appendix C. 

Any change to the Contract price specified in Clause GCC 39.1 can be made only if the Parties have agreed to the revised scope of Services pursuant to Clause GCC 16 and have amended in writing the Terms of Reference in Appendix A.

Taxes and Duties

The Consultant, Sub-consultants and Experts are responsible for meeting any and all tax liabilities arising out of the Contract unless it is stated otherwise in the SCC.  

As an exception to the above and as stated in the SCC, all local identifiable indirect taxes (itemized and finalized at Contract negotiations) are reimbursed to the Consultant or are paid by the Client on behalf of the Consultant.

Currency of Payment

Any payment under this Contract shall be made in the currency (ies) of the Contract.

Mode of Billing and Payment

The total payments under this Contract shall not exceed the Contract price set forth in Clause GCC 39.1.

The payments under this Contract shall be made in lump-sum instalments against deliverables specified in Appendix A. The payments will be made according to the payment schedule stated in the SCC.  

42.2.1	Advance payment: Unless otherwise indicated in the SCC, an advance payment shall be made against an advance payment bank guarantee acceptable to the Client in an amount (or amounts) and in a currency (or currencies) specified in the SCC. Such guarantee (i) is to remain effective until the advance payment has been fully set off, and (ii) is to be in the form set forth in Appendix D, or in such other form as the Client shall have approved in writing. The advance payments will be set off by the Client in equal portions against the lump-sum installments specified in the SCC until said advance payments have been fully set off. 

42.2.2	 The Lump-Sum Installment Payments. The Client shall pay the Consultant within sixty (60) days after the receipt by the Client of the deliverable(s) and the cover invoice for the related lump-sum installment payment. The payment can be withheld if the Client does not approve the submitted deliverable(s) as satisfactory in which case the Client shall provide comments to the Consultant within the same sixty (60) days period. The Consultant shall thereupon promptly make any necessary corrections, and thereafter the foregoing process shall be repeated.    

42.2.3	 The Final Payment. The final payment under this Clause shall be made only after the final report have been submitted by the Consultant and approved as satisfactory by the Client.  The Services shall then be deemed completed and finally accepted by the Client. The last lump-sum installment shall be deemed approved for payment by the Client  within ninety (90) calendar days after receipt of the final report by the Client unless the Client, within such ninety (90) calendar day period, gives written notice to the Consultant specifying in detail deficiencies in the Services, the final report.  The Consultant shall thereupon promptly make any necessary corrections, and thereafter the foregoing process shall be repeated.  

42.2.4 All payments under this Contract shall be made to the accounts of the Consultant specified in the SCC.

42.2.5	 With the exception of the final payment under 42.2.3 above, payments do not constitute acceptance of the whole Services nor relieve the Consultant of any obligations hereunder.	

Interest on Delayed Payments

If the Client had delayed payments beyond fifteen (15) days after the due date stated in Clause GCC 42.2.2, interest shall be paid to the Consultant on any amount due by, not paid on, such due date for each day of delay at the annual rate stated in the SCC.

G.  Fairness and Good Faith

Good Faith

The Parties undertake to act in good faith with respect to each other’s rights under this Contract and to adopt all reasonable measures to ensure the realization of the objectives of this Contract.

H.  Settlement of Disputes

Amicable Settlement

The Parties shall seek to resolve any dispute amicably by mutual consultation. 

If either Party objects to any action or inaction of the other Party, the objecting Party may file a written Notice of Dispute to the other Party providing in detail the basis of the dispute. The Party receiving the Notice of Dispute will consider it and respond in writing within fourteen (14) days after receipt. If that Party fails to respond within fourteen (14) days, or the dispute cannot be amicably settled within fourteen (14) days following the response of that Party, Clause GCC 46.1 shall apply. 

Dispute Resolution

Any dispute between the Parties arising under or related to this Contract that cannot be settled amicably may be referred to by either Party to the adjudication/arbitration in accordance with the provisions specified in the SCC.



II. General Conditions

Attachment 1 

Fraud and Corruption

(Text in this Attachment shall not be modified)



Purpose

The Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines and this annex apply with respect to procurement under Bank Investment Project Financing operations.

Requirements

The Bank requires that Borrowers (including beneficiaries of Bank financing); bidders (applicants/proposers), consultants, contractors and suppliers; any sub-contractors, sub-consultants, service providers or suppliers; any agents (whether declared or not); and any of their personnel, observe the highest standard of ethics during the procurement process, selection and contract execution of Bank-financed contracts, and refrain from Fraud and Corruption.

To this end, the Bank:

Defines, for the purposes of this provision, the terms set forth below as follows:

“corrupt practice” is the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, of anything of value to influence improperly the actions of another party;

“fraudulent practice” is any act or omission, including misrepresentation, that knowingly or recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation;

“collusive practice” is an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve an improper purpose, including to influence improperly the actions of another party;

“coercive practice” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or indirectly, any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions of a party;

“obstructive practice” is:

deliberately destroying, falsifying, altering, or concealing of evidence material to the investigation or making false statements to investigators in order to materially impede a Bank investigation into allegations of a corrupt, fraudulent, coercive, or collusive practice; and/or threatening, harassing, or intimidating any party to prevent it from disclosing its knowledge of matters relevant to the investigation or from pursuing the investigation; or

acts intended to materially impede the exercise of the Bank’s inspection and audit rights provided for under paragraph 2.2 e. below.

Rejects a proposal for award if the Bank determines that the firm or individual recommended for award, any of its personnel, or its agents, or its sub-consultants, sub-contractors, service providers, suppliers and/ or their employees, has, directly or indirectly, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive, or obstructive practices in competing for the contract in question;

In addition to the legal remedies set out in the relevant Legal Agreement, may take other appropriate actions, including declaring misprocurement, if the Bank determines at any time that representatives of the Borrower or of a recipient of any part of the proceeds of the loan engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive, or obstructive practices during the procurement process, selection and/or execution of the contract in question,  without the Borrower having taken timely and appropriate action satisfactory to the Bank to address such practices when they occur, including by failing to inform the Bank in a timely manner at the time  they knew of the practices; 

Pursuant to the Bank’s Anti- Corruption Guidelines and in accordance with the Bank’s prevailing sanctions policies and procedures, may sanction a firm or individual, either indefinitely or for a stated period of time, including by publicly declaring such firm or individual ineligible (i) to be awarded or otherwise benefit from a Bank-financed contract, financially or in any other manner; (ii) to be a nominated sub-contractor, consultant, manufacturer or supplier, or service provider of an otherwise eligible firm being awarded a Bank-financed contract; and (iii) to receive the proceeds of any loan made by the Bank or otherwise to participate further in the preparation or implementation of any Bank-financed project; 

Requires that a clause be included in bidding/request for proposals documents and in contracts financed by a Bank loan, requiring (i) bidders (applicants/proposers), consultants, contractors, and suppliers, and their sub-contractors, sub-consultants, service providers, suppliers, agents personnel, permit the Bank to inspect all accounts, records and other documents relating to the  procurement process, selection and/or contract execution,, and to have them audited by auditors appointed by the Bank.





Special Conditions of Contract

Number of GC Clause

Amendments of, and Supplements to, Clauses in the General Conditions of Contract

1.1(a) 

The Contract shall be construed in accordance with the law of Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.

4.1

The language is: English.

6.1 and 6.2

The addresses are:

Client: Ministry of Agriculture,

Attention: Ato Habtamu Hailu (Project Coordinator) or Ato Kinfu Bekabil (Senior Procurement and Contract Management Specialist), 

Facsimile number: +251-911-193610

Electronic mail address: kinfumz@yahoo.com

Consultant :				

Attention :		

Facsimile :		

E-mail (where permitted) :	

8.1

NA

9.1

The Authorized Representatives are:

The Authorized Representatives are:

For the Client:  Ato Habtamu Hailu, RLLP Coordinating Unit Coordinator

For the Consultant:	[name, title]	

11.1

NA

12.1

Termination of Contract for Failure to Become Effective:



The time period shall be 30 days.

13.1

Commencement of Services will be May 1, 2024



The number of days shall be 10.



Confirmation of Key Experts’ availability to start the Assignment shall be submitted to the Client in writing as a written statement signed by each Key Expert.

14.1

Expiration of Contract:



The time period shall be Three months

21 b.

The Client reserves the right to determine on a case-by-case basis whether the Consultant should be disqualified from providing goods, works or non-consulting services due to a conflict of a nature described in Clause GCC 21.1.3

Yes___X___ No _____

23.1

No additional provisions.

24.1



The insurance coverage against the risks shall be as follows:



Professional liability insurance, with a minimum coverage of contract price

27.1

NA

27.2



The Consultant shall not use these documents provided by the client and the audit report for purposes unrelated to this Contract without the prior written approval of the Client.

29. Code of Conduct

The Consultant is “required” to have a Code of Conduct for Experts (ES).

32. Removal of Experts or Sub-consultants

Experts or Sub-consultants who are found to be in breach of the Consultant’s Code of Conduct (ES) (including on sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and sexual abuse) shall be replaced by the Consultant, or at the Client’s written request.

33.1(g)

The client will assist the consultant by facilitating the focal person of each site and providing the required documents. 

39.1

The Contract price is: ____________________ [insert amount and currency for each currency as applicable] [indicate: inclusive or exclusive] of local indirect taxes.



Any indirect local taxes chargeable in respect of this Contract for the Services provided by the Consultant shall [insert as appropriate: “be paid” or “reimbursed”] by the Client [insert as appropriate: “for “or “to”] the Consultant. 



The amount of such taxes is as per the Ethiopian Government Tax Laws [insert the amount as finalized at the Contract’s negotiations on the basis of the estimates provided by the Consultant in Form FIN-2 of the Consultant’s Financial Proposal.

40.1 and 40.2

The Client warrants that [choose one applicable option consistent with the ITC 16.3 and the outcome of the Contract’s negotiations (Form FIN-2, part B “Indirect Local Tax – Estimates”):

 The Client shall pay on behalf of the Consultant, the Sub-consultants and the Experts,” OR “the Client shall reimburse the Consultant, the Sub-consultants and the Experts 

any indirect taxes, duties, fees, levies and other impositions imposed, under the applicable law in the Client’s country, on the Consultant, the Sub-consultants and the Experts in respect of:

(a)	any payments whatsoever made to the Consultant, Sub-consultants and the Experts (other than nationals or permanent residents of the Client’s country), in connection with the carrying out of the Services;

(b)	any equipment, materials and supplies brought into the Client’s country by the Consultant or Sub-consultants for the purpose of carrying out the Services and which, after having been brought into such territories, will be subsequently withdrawn by them;

(c)	any equipment imported for the purpose of carrying out the Services and paid for out of funds provided by the Client and which is treated as property of the Client;

(d)	any property brought into the Client’s country by the Consultant, any Sub-consultants or the Experts (other than nationals or permanent residents of the Client’s country), or the eligible dependents of such experts for their personal use and which will subsequently be withdrawn by them upon their respective departure from the Client’s country, provided that:

(i) the Consultant, Sub-consultants and experts shall follow the usual customs procedures of the Client’s country in importing property into the Client’s country; and



(ii) if the Consultant, Sub-consultants or Experts do not withdraw but dispose of any property in the Client’s country upon which customs duties and taxes have been exempted, the Consultant, Sub-consultants or Experts, as the case may be, (a) shall bear such customs duties and taxes in conformity with the regulations of the Client’s country, or (b) shall reimburse them to the Client if they were paid by the Client at the time the property in question was brought into the Client’s country.

42.2

The payment schedule:

Advance payment: 20% of the contract to be paid as advance against equal amount of Bank Guarantee.

1st payment: 20% of the contract price to be paid upon submission and approval of inception report. 

2nd payment: 30% of the contract price will be paid after the submission and approval of the draft report.

3rd payment: the remaining 30% of the contract price shall be paid upon approval of the final report 

42.2.1  

The advance bank payment guarantee should be in the same currency(ies)of financial proposal. 



The following provisions shall apply to the advance payment and the advance bank payment guarantee:



(1)	An advance payment [of [insert amount] in foreign currency] [and of [insert amount] in local currency] shall be made within [insert number] days after the receipt of an advance bank payment guarantee by the Client. The advance payment will be set off by the Client in equal portions against [list the payments against which the advance is offset].



(2)	The advance bank payment guarantee shall be in the amount and in the currency of the currency (ies) of the advance payment.



(3)  The bank guarantee will be released when the advance payment has been fully set off. 

42.2.4

The accounts are:



for foreign currency: [insert account].

for local currency: [insert account].

43.1

The interest rate is: lending rate of the National Bank of Ethiopia plus 2%” for administrative costs.

46.1



Disputes shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the following provisions:

1.	Selection of Arbitrators.  Each dispute submitted by a Party to arbitration shall be heard by a sole arbitrator or an arbitration panel composed of three (3) arbitrators, in accordance with the following provisions:



(a)	Where the Parties agree that the dispute concerns a technical matter, they may agree to appoint a sole arbitrator or, failing agreement on the identity of such sole arbitrator within thirty (30) days after receipt by the other Party of the proposal of a name for such an appointment by the Party who initiated the proceedings, either Party may apply to [name an appropriate international professional body, e.g., the Federation Internationale des Ingenieurs-Conseil (FIDIC) of Lausanne, Switzerland] for a list of not fewer than five (5) nominees and, on receipt of such list, the Parties shall alternately strike names therefrom, and the last remaining nominee on the list shall be the sole arbitrator for the matter in dispute.  If the last remaining nominee has not been determined in this manner within sixty (60) days of the date of the list, [insert the name of the same professional body as above] shall appoint, upon the request of either Party and from such list or otherwise, a sole arbitrator for the matter in dispute.



(b)	Where the Parties do not agree that the dispute concerns a technical matter, the Client and the Consultant shall each appoint one (1) arbitrator, and these two arbitrators shall jointly appoint a third arbitrator, who shall chair the arbitration panel.  If the arbitrators named by the Parties do not succeed in appointing a third arbitrator within thirty (30) days after the latter of the two (2) arbitrators named by the Parties has been appointed, the third arbitrator shall, at the request of either Party, be appointed by [name an appropriate international appointing authority, e.g., the Secretary General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, The Hague; the Secretary General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, Washington, D.C.; the International Chamber of Commerce, Paris; etc.].



(c)	If, in a dispute subject to paragraph (b) above, one Party fails to appoint its arbitrator within thirty (30) days after the other Party has appointed its arbitrator, the Party which has named an arbitrator may apply to the [name the same appointing authority as in said paragraph (b)] to appoint a sole arbitrator for the matter in dispute, and the arbitrator appointed pursuant to such application shall be the sole arbitrator for that dispute.



2.	Rules of Procedure. Except as otherwise stated herein, arbitration proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure for arbitration of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) as in force on the date of this Contract.



3.	Substitute Arbitrators.  If for any reason an arbitrator is unable to perform his/her function, a substitute shall be appointed in the same manner as the original arbitrator.



4.	Nationality and Qualifications of Arbitrators.  The sole arbitrator or the third arbitrator appointed pursuant to paragraphs 1(a) through 1(c) above shall be an internationally recognized legal or technical expert with extensive experience in relation to the matter in dispute and shall not be a national of the Consultant’s home country [If the Consultant consists of more than one entity, add:  or of the home country of any of their members or Parties] or of the Government’s country.  For the purposes of this Clause, “home country” means any of:

(a)	the country of incorporation of the Consultant [If the Consultant consists of more than one entity, add: or of any of their members or Parties]; or

(b)	the country in which the Consultant’s [or any of their members’ or Parties’] principal place of business is located; or 

(c)	the country of nationality of a majority of the Consultant’s [or of any members’ or Parties’] shareholders; or

(d)	the country of nationality of the Sub-consultants concerned, where the dispute involves a subcontract.



5.	Miscellaneous.  In any arbitration proceeding hereunder:



(a)	proceedings shall, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, be held in [select a country which is neither the Client’s country nor the Consultant’s country];



(b)	the [type of language] language shall be the official language for all purposes; and



(c)	the decision of the sole arbitrator or of a majority of the arbitrators (or of the third arbitrator if there is no such majority) shall be final and binding and shall be enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction, and the Parties hereby waive any objections to or claims of immunity in respect of such enforcement.





Appendices

Appendix A – Terms of Reference



[This Appendix shall include the final Terms of Reference (TORs) worked out by the Client and the Consultant during the negotiations; dates for completion of various tasks; location of performance for different tasks; detailed reporting requirements and list of deliverables against which the payments to the Consultant will be made; Client’s input, including counterpart personnel assigned by the Client to work on the Consultant’s team; specific tasks or actions that require prior approval by the Client. 



Insert the text based on the Section 7 (Terms of Reference) of the ITC in the RFP and modified based on the Forms TECH-1 through TECH-5 of the Consultant’s Proposal. Highlight the changes to Section 7 of the RFP]



………………………………………………………………………………………………





Appendix B - Key Experts 



[Insert a table based on Form TECH-6 of the Consultant’s Technical Proposal and finalized at the Contract’s negotiations. Attach the CVs (updated and signed by the respective Key Experts) demonstrating the qualifications of Key Experts.]





……………………………………………………………………………………………………





Appendix C – Breakdown of Contract Price



[Insert the table with the unit rates to arrive at the breakdown of the lump-sum price. The table shall be based on [Form FIN-3 and FIN-4] of the Consultant’s Proposal and reflect any changes agreed at the Contract negotiations, if any. The footnote shall list such changes made to [Form FIN-3 and FIN-4] at the negotiations or state that none has been made.]



When the Consultant has been selected under Quality-Based Selection method, also add the following:



“The agreed remuneration rates shall be stated in the attached Model Form I. This form shall be prepared on the basis of Appendix A to Form FIN-3 of the RFP “Consultants’ Representations regarding Costs and Charges” submitted by the Consultant to the Client prior to the Contract’s negotiations.



 Should these representations be found by the Client (either through inspections or audits pursuant to Clause GCC 25.2 or through other means) to be materially incomplete or inaccurate, the Client shall be entitled to introduce appropriate modifications in the remuneration rates affected by such materially incomplete or inaccurate representations.  Any such modification shall have retroactive effect and, in case remuneration has already been paid by the Client before any such modification, (i) the Client shall be entitled to offset any excess payment against the next monthly payment to the Consultants, or (ii) if there are no further payments to be made by the Client to the Consultants, the Consultants shall reimburse to the Client any excess payment within thirty (30) days of receipt of a written claim of the Client.  Any such claim by the Client for reimbursement must be made within twelve (12) calendar months after receipt by the Client of a final report and a final statement approved by the Client in accordance with Clause GCC 42.2.3 of this Contract.”]





Model Form I

Breakdown of Agreed Fixed Rates in Consultant’s Contract



We hereby confirm that we have agreed to pay to the Experts listed, who will be involved in performing the Services, the basic fees and away from the home office allowances (if applicable) indicated below:



(Expressed in [insert name of currency])*



Experts

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Name

Position

Basic Remuneration rate  per Working Month/Day/Year

Social Charges1

Overhead1

Subtotal

Profit2

Away from Home Office Allowance

Agreed Fixed Rate per Working Month/Day/Hour

Agreed Fixed Rate per Working Month/Day/Hour1

Home Office





































Work in the Client’s Country







































1	Expressed as percentage of 1

2	Expressed as percentage of 4

*    If more than one currency, add a table





			

Signature	Date



Name and Title:  	





Appendix D - Form of Advance Payments Guarantee

[See Clause GCC 42.2.1 and SCC 42.2.1]



{Guarantor letterhead or SWIFT identifier code}



Bank Guarantee for Advance Payment 



Guarantor: ___________________ [insert commercial Bank’s Name, and Address of Issuing Branch or Office]

Beneficiary:	_________________ [insert Name and Address of Client]

Date:	____________[insert date]____

ADVANCE PAYMENT GUARANTEE No.:	___________[insert number]______

We have been informed that ____________ [name of Consultant or a name of the Joint Venture, same as appears on the signed Contract] (hereinafter called "the Consultant") has entered into Contract No. _____________ [reference number of the contract] dated ___[insert date]_________ with the Beneficiary, for the provision of __________________ [brief description of Services] (hereinafter called "the Contract"). 

Furthermore, we understand that, according to the conditions of the Contract, an advance payment in the sum of ___________ [insert amount in figures] (                       ) [amount in words] is to be made against an advance payment guarantee.

At the request of the Consultant, we, as Guarantor, hereby irrevocably undertake to pay the Beneficiary any sum or sums not exceeding in total an amount of ___________ [amount in figures] (                       ) [amount in words]1 upon receipt by us of the Beneficiary’s complying demand  supported by the Beneficiary’s a written statement, whether in the demand itself or in a separate signed document accompanying or identifying the demand, stating that the Consultant is  in breach of its obligation under the Contract because the Consultant:



(a)   	has failed to repay the advance payment in accordance with the Contract conditions, specifying the amount which the Consultant has failed to repay;

(b)	has used the advance payment for purposes other than toward providing the Services under the Contract.

It is a condition for any claim and payment under this guarantee to be made that the advance payment referred to above must have been received by the Consultant on their account number ___________ at _________________ [name and address of bank].

The maximum amount of this guarantee shall be progressively reduced by the amount of the advance payment repaid by the Consultant as indicated in certified statements or invoices marked as “paid” by the Client which shall be presented to us.  This guarantee shall expire, at the latest, upon our receipt of the payment certificate or paid invoice indicating that the Consultant has made full repayment of the amount of the advance payment, or on the __ day of _[month]__________, [year]__,2  whichever is earlier.  Consequently, any demand for payment under this guarantee must be received by us at this office on or before that date.



This guarantee is subject to the Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees (URDG) 2010 revision, ICC Publication No. 758.



_____________________ 

[signature(s)]



{Note:	All italicized text is for indicative purposes only to assist in preparing this form and shall be deleted from the final product.}





Appendix E - Code of Conduct (ES)



[Note to Client: to be included for supervision of infrastructure contracts (such as Plant or Works) and for other consulting service where the social risks are substantial or high]





PART III



Section 9. Notification of Intention to Award and Beneficial Ownership Forms





Notification of Intention to Award



[This Notification of Intention to Award shall be sent to each Consultant whose Financial Proposal was opened. Send this Notification to the authorized representative of the Consultant].



For the attention of Consultant’s authorized representative 

Name: [insert authorized representative’s name]

Address: [insert authorized representative’s address]

Telephone/Fax numbers: [insert authorized representative’s telephone/fax numbers]

Email Address: [insert authorized representative’s email address]

[IMPORTANT: insert the date that this Notification is transmitted to all Consultants. The Notification must be sent to all Consultants simultaneously. This means on the same date and as close to the same time as possible.]  



DATE OF TRANSMISSION: This Notification is sent by: [email/fax] on [date] (local time) 

Notification of Intention to Award

Client: [insert the name of the Client]

Contract title: [insert the name of the contract]

Country: [insert country where RFP is issued]

Loan No. /Credit No. /Grant No.: [insert reference number for loan/credit/grant]

RFP No: [insert RFP reference number from Procurement Plan]

This Notification of Intention to Award (Notification) notifies you of our decision to award the above contract. The transmission of this Notification begins the Standstill Period. During the Standstill Period you may:

request a debriefing in relation to the evaluation of your Proposal, and/or

submit a Procurement-related Complaint in relation to the decision to award the contract.

The successful Consultant

Name:

[insert name of successful Consultant]

Address:

[insert address of the successful Consultant]

Contract price:

[insert contract price of the successful Consultant]



Short listed Consultants [INSTRUCTIONS: insert names of all short listed Consultants and indicate which Consultants submitted Proposals. Where the selection method requires it, state the price offered by each Consultant as read out, and as evaluated. Include overall technical scores and scores assigned for each criterion and sub-criterion. Select Full Technical Proposal (FTP) or Simplified Technical Proposal (STP) in the last column below.]

Name of Consultant

Submitted Proposal

[use for FTP]

Overall technical scores

[use for STP]

Overall technical scores

Financial Proposal price (if applicable)

Evaluated Financial Proposal price 

(if applicable)

Combined score and ranking (if applicable)

[insert name]

[yes/no]

Criterion (i): [insert score]

Criterion (ii): [insert score]

Criterion (iii): [insert score]

Sub-criterion a: 

1: [insert score]

2: [insert score]

3: [insert score]

Sub-criterion b: 

1: [insert score]

2: [insert score]

3: [insert score]

Sub-criterion c: 

1: [insert score]

2: [insert score]

3: [insert score]

Criterion (iv): [insert score]

Criterion (v): [insert score]

Total score: [insert score]

Criterion (i): [insert score]

Criterion (ii): [insert score]

Sub-criterion a: [insert score]

Sub-criterion b: [insert score]

Sub-criterion c: [insert score]

Total score: [insert score]

[Proposal price]

[evaluated price]

Combined Score:

[combined score]

Ranking: 

[ranking]



[insert name]

[yes/no]

Criterion (i): [insert score]

Criterion (ii): [insert score]

Criterion (iii): [insert score]

Sub-criterion a: 

1: [insert score]

2: [insert score]

3: [insert score]

Sub-criterion b: 

1: [insert score]

2: [insert score]

3: [insert score]

Sub-criterion c: 

1: [insert score]

2: [insert score]

3: [insert score]

Criterion (iv): [insert score]

Criterion (v): [insert score]

Total score: [insert score]

Criterion (i): [insert score]

Criterion (ii): [insert score]

Sub-criterion a: [insert score]

Sub-criterion b: [insert score]

Sub-criterion c: [insert score]

Total score: [insert score]

[Proposal price]

[evaluated price]

Combined Score:

[combined score]

Ranking: 

[ranking]



[insert name]

[yes/no]

Criterion (i): [insert score]

Criterion (ii): [insert score]

Criterion (iii): [insert score]

Sub-criterion a: 

1: [insert score]

2: [insert score]

3: [insert score]

Sub-criterion b: 

1: [insert score]

2: [insert score]

3: [insert score]

Sub-criterion c: 

1: [insert score]

2: [insert score]

3: [insert score]

Criterion (iv): [insert score]

Criterion (v): [insert score]

Total score: [insert score]

Criterion (i): [insert score]

Criterion (ii): [insert score]

Sub-criterion a: [insert score]

Sub-criterion b: [insert score]

Sub-criterion c: [insert score]

Total score: [insert score]

[Proposal price]

[evaluated price]

Combined Score:

[combined score]

Ranking: 

[ranking]



[insert name]

…











…

…

















Reason/s why your Proposal was unsuccessful [Delete if the combined score already reveals the reason]

[INSTRUCTIONS; State the reason/s why this Consultant’s Proposal was unsuccessful. Do NOT include: (a) a point by point comparison with another Consultant’s Proposal or (b) information that is marked confidential by the Consultant in its Proposal.]

How to request a debriefing [This applies only if your proposal was unsuccessful as stated under point (3) above]

DEADLINE: The deadline to request a debriefing expires at midnight on [insert date] (local time).

You may request a debriefing in relation to the results of the evaluation of your Proposal. If you decide to request a debriefing your written request must be made within three (3) Business Days of receipt of this Notification of Intention to Award. 

Provide the contract name, reference number, name of the Consultant, contact details; and address the request for debriefing as follows:

Attention: [insert full name of person, if applicable]

Title/position: [insert title/position]

Agency: [insert name of Client]

Email address: [insert email address]

Fax number: [insert fax number] delete if not used

If your request for a debriefing is received within the 3 Business Days deadline, we will provide the debriefing within five (5) Business Days of receipt of your request. If we are unable to provide the debriefing within this period, the Standstill Period shall be extended by five (5) Business Days after the date that the debriefing is provided. If this happens, we will notify you and confirm the date that the extended Standstill Period will end. 

The debriefing may be in writing, by phone, video conference call or in person. We shall promptly advise you in writing how the debriefing will take place and confirm the date and time.

If the deadline to request a debriefing has expired, you may still request a debriefing. In this case, we will provide the debriefing as soon as practicable, and normally no later than fifteen (15) Business Days from the date of publication of the Contract Award Notice.

How to make a complaint 

DEADLINE: The deadline for submitting a Procurement-related Complaint challenging the decision to award the contract expires on midnight, [insert date] (local time).

Provide the contract name, reference number, name of the Consultant, contact details; and address the Procurement-related Complaint as follows:

Attention: [insert full name of person, if applicable]

Title/position: [insert title/position]

Agency: [insert name of Client]

Email address: [insert email address]

Fax number: [insert fax number] delete if not used

 [At this point in the procurement process] [ Upon receipt of this notification] you may submit a Procurement-related Complaint challenging the decision to award the contract. You do not need to have requested, or received, a debriefing before making this complaint. Your complaint must be submitted within the Standstill Period and received by us before the Standstill Period ends.

Further information:

For more information  see the “Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers (Procurement Regulations) (Annex III).” You should read these provisions before preparing and submitting your complaint. In addition, the World Bank’s Guidance “How to make a Procurement-related Complaint” provides a useful explanation of the process, as well as a sample letter of complaint.

In summary, there are four essential requirements:

You must be an ‘interested party’. In this case, that means a Consultant who has submitted a Proposal in this selection process, and is the recipient of a Notification of Intention to Award.

The complaint can only challenge the decision to award the contract. 

You must submit the complaint within the deadline stated above.

You must include, in your complaint, all of the information required by the Procurement Regulations (as described in Annex III).

Standstill Period 

DEADLINE: The Standstill Period is due to end at midnight on [insert date] (local time).

The Standstill Period lasts ten (10) Business Days after the date of transmission of this Notification of Intention to Award.

The Standstill Period may be extended. This may happen where we are unable to provide a debriefing within the five (5) Business Day deadline. If this happens, we will notify you of the extension. 

If you have any questions regarding this Notification, please do not hesitate to contact us.

On behalf of [insert the name of the Client]:

Signature: 	______________________________________________

Name:	______________________________________________

Title/position:	______________________________________________

Telephone:	______________________________________________

Email:	______________________________________________



Beneficial Ownership Disclosure Form 

INSTRUCTIONS TO CONSULTANTS: DELETE THIS BOX ONCE YOU HAVE COMPLETED THE FORM



This Beneficial Ownership Disclosure Form (“Form”) is to be completed by the successful Consultant.  In case of joint venture, the Consultant must submit a separate Form for each member.  The beneficial ownership information to be submitted in this Form shall be current as of the date of its submission. 



For the purposes of this Form, a Beneficial Owner of a Consultant is any natural person who ultimately owns or controls the Consultant by meeting one or more of the following conditions:



directly or indirectly holding 25% or more of the shares

directly or indirectly holding 25% or more of the voting rights

directly or indirectly having the right to appoint a majority of the board of directors or equivalent governing body of the Consultant





Request for Proposal reference No.: [insert identification no]

Name of the Assignment: [insert name of the assignment]



To: [insert complete name of Client]



In response to your notification of award dated [insert date of notification of award] to furnish additional information on beneficial ownership: [select one option as applicable and delete the options that are not applicable] 



(i) we hereby provide the following beneficial ownership information.  



Details of beneficial ownership 

Identity of Beneficial Owner



Directly or indirectly holding 25% or more of the shares

(Yes / No)



Directly or indirectly holding 25 % or more of the Voting Rights

(Yes / No)



Directly or indirectly having the right to appoint a majority of the board of the directors or an equivalent governing body of the Consultant

(Yes / No)

[include full name (last, middle, first), nationality, country of residence]









OR



(ii) We declare that there is no Beneficial Owner meeting one or more of the following conditions: 



directly or indirectly holding 25% or more of the shares

directly or indirectly holding 25% or more of the voting rights

directly or indirectly having the right to appoint a majority of the board of directors or equivalent governing body of the Consultant





OR 



(iii) We declare that we are unable to identify any Beneficial Owner meeting one or more of the following conditions. [If this option is selected, the Consultant shall provide explanation on why it is unable to identify any Beneficial Owner]

directly or indirectly holding 25% or more of the shares

directly or indirectly holding 25% or more of the voting rights

directly or indirectly having the right to appoint a majority of the board of directors or equivalent governing body of the Consultant]”



Name of the Consultant: *[insert complete name of the Consultant]_________



Name of the person duly authorized to sign the Proposal on behalf of the Consultant: **[insert complete name of person duly authorized to sign the Proposal]___________



Title of the person signing the Proposal: [insert complete title of the person signing the Proposal]______



Signature of the person named above: [insert signature of person whose name and capacity are shown above]_____



Date signed [insert date of signing] day of [insert month], [insert year]_____









* In the case of the Proposal submitted by a Joint Venture specify the name of the Joint Venture as Consultant. In the event that the Consultant is a joint venture, each reference to “Consultant” in the Beneficial Ownership Disclosure Form (including this Introduction thereto) shall be read to refer to the joint venture member. 

** Person signing the Proposal shall have the power of attorney given by the Consultant. The power of attorney shall be attached with the Proposal Schedules. 



